TITLE: Treatment of soybean processing residues for energy recovery and environmental compliance: Technical and economic feasibility


1 Introduction

The continuous use of fossil fuels and the effect of greenhouse gases emission on the environment pose a serious threat to humanity due to anthropogenic climate change. As a result, the gap between environmental sustainability and economic growth is increasing. Therefore, it is necessary to seek an alternative source of clean fuel that has the potential to meet present and future energy demands, promoting a circular economy in order to achieve a better balance and harmony between economy, environment, and society [1]. One of the processes in which organic wastes are converted into biofuels and other products is anaerobic digestion (AD) [2].

AD importance as a technology for the treatment of organic wastes is very well established, since it presents a more favorable energy balance than the conventional aerobic processes, because of the lower need for capital investment compared to other renewable energies, in addition to requiring less energy than other methods, i.e. gasification or pyrolysis, due to its low operating temperature [3]. Other advantages of AD include the possibility of recovering and using methane gas as a fuel in vehicles after purification, as well as in boilers to produce steam and electricity. Furthermore, the digestate can be used as soil fertilizer within the law limits [4].

Soybean molasses, a by-product of the manufacturing of soy protein concentrate (SPC), is a substrate that can be used in AD. Soybean molasses is a viscous brown liquid by-product, which is a source of sugars (65%), such as: sucrose, stachyose, and raffinose; proteins (8%); macro and micronutrients (14%), such as: potassium, phosphorus, and magnesium; and lipids (13%) [5]. However, due to the high C/N ratio (approximately 45) [6], methanogens will rapidly consume the nitrogen for meeting their protein requirements and will no longer react with the leftover carbon content of the molasses. As a result, gas production will be low [7]. In addition, soybean molasses presents environmental disposal issues, and because of that researchers and industries have been studying applications of molasses for ethanol [8]; biosurfactants [9]; and acids [10] production. All these concerns may be solved by co-processing, which is a feasible option to overcome the drawbacks of mono-digestion [11].

Another by-product generated in soybean processing which can be utilized along with molasses to produce biogas is okara, a yellowish powder. Okara is rich in fiber and protein (C/N ratio of 5.8) with a good nutritional and a low market value [12,13]. In addition to improving nitrogen content, the co-processing of molasses and okara can reduce the total volume generated by industries. According to ABIOVE [14], in 2021, Brazil processed 46.5 million tons of soybeans, of which 35.5 million tons of meal, 9.4 million tons of oil, and 1.6 million tons of soy milk were produced. Considering the following ratios: 0.27 g-molasses/g-meal; and 1.1 g-okara/g-milk [8,15], it results in 9.60 and 1.76 million tons of molasses and okara produced, respectively.

The Anaerobic Sequencing Batch Biofilm Reactor (AnSBBR), one of the reactors used for AD, has been the subject of multiple prior research focused at environmental compliance and energy recovery from various types of wastewater, usually in the form of biogas, in order to enable its full-scale application [16]. This reactor provides a series of advantages in relation to conventional continuous reactors such as: better operational control; higher solids retention; high organic matter removal efficiency; and high control of effluent quality. In addition, this reactor has advantages in terms of operating costs [17].

As mentioned previously, AD is a complex process; it consists of either positive or negative interaction of thousands microorganism species including those from Archaea and Bacteria Domains. Given the fact that scientists are interested in improving bio-fuel production which is a microbial-driven process, linking microbial community composition to reactor performance as a result of operating parameter variations provides important insights in this research field. It has become of increasing interest to understand the process in terms of the organisms that are populating bioreactors, focusing on the active ones, and their possible metabolic pathway shift. Over the last 10 years, the Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) has revolutionized the DNA sequencing methods. NGS cost has decreased significantly allowing massive exploration and description of Earth's biodiversity and organisms taxonomy. Consequently, NGS has become an important genetic tool in biofuel production studies worldwide [18].

Therefore, this work assessed methane production in an AnSBBR from soybean molasses treatment at mesophilic conditions. The evaluation was focused on how the system's stability and performance were affected by altering the feeding strategy and fill time (Step I), applied organic loading rate (Step II), temperature (Step III), and co-processing with okara (Step IV). Relative abundance at genus level within the microbial community was assessed along the conditions (Step V). Finally, scale-up and economic estimation based on the net present value (NPV), internal rate of return (IRR), and payback was performed (Step VI) using industrial data. The results of this paper can open new perspectives in light of the initiatives to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and change the countries' energy matrix towards sustainable sources.


2 Material and Methods


2.1 Bioreactor, inoculum, and inert support

An AnSBBR with recirculation of the liquid phase was used and the system is described in detail in Lovato et al. [19]. The system's total volume was 4.65 L, which included 2.65 L of working volume plus 2.0 L of biomass and inert support. The system was kept inside a chamber at 25, 30 or 35 ± 1 °C, controlled by a heating system.

The inoculum, inert support and seed sludge immobilization procedure used during the experiments were the same described by Lovato et al. [20].


2.2 Wastewater composition

At first, the wastewater fed to AnSBBR reactor was formulated with soybean molasses, which was provided by the CJ Selecta company, located in Minas Gerais, Brazil. In the case of co-processing, okara was added to the wastewater (Table 1 ). Tap water was used to dilute the wastewater, according to desired concentration. Alkalinity was provided by adding sodium bicarbonate (1.00–0.25 g-NaHCO_3/g-COD) to keep the pH at approximately 7.5. As the C/N ratio of molasses is high, the nitrogen content is deficient. Thus, urea was also added in the medium for nitrogen supplementation (5.8 mg-urea/L for a concentration of 1000 mg-COD/L).

In the co-processing condition, soybean molasses, okara, and water were mixed in a blender for 25 min, to facilitate the accessibility of holocellulose (cellulose and hemicellulose present in okara) necessary to increase the potential of biogas production [21].


2.3 Physical-chemical analyses

Reactor monitoring was performed by analyzing influent and effluent samples according to APHA [22]. Alkalinity determination was performed according to Ripley et al. [23]. Total carbohydrates were analyzed according to Dubois et al. [24]. Intermediate compounds of the anaerobic metabolism (acetic, propionic, butyric, and ethanol) and biogas composition (hydrogen, methane, and carbon dioxide) were analyzed by gas chromatography using an Agilent® 7890 chromatograph equipped with a flame ionization and thermal conductivity detector [20]. Lactic acid concentration was measured by a spectrophotometric method [25].


2.4 Molecular biology and taxonomic analysis

Biomass samples of the inoculum and 5 operational conditions (C6–C10) were taken from the reactor and stored at −20 °C until further analysis. The DNeasy PowerSoil Pro Kits (QIAGEN®, Hilden, Germany) were used for DNA extraction accordingly to the manufacturer's protocol. The V4 16 S rRNA region was the target of a PCR reaction that amplified DNA using 515 F/806 R primers [26] under the following thermocycler conditions: 94 °C for 3 min followed by 30 cycles of 94 °C for 30 s, 50 °C for 30 s, 72 °C for 30 s with final extension 10 min at 72 °C. The PCR product were purified using Beckman AMPure XP Beads. After purification, Illumina adapters from Nextera XT kit were ligated in an indexing PCR and its products were afterwards bead-based purified. It's followed by library normalization to ensure an even read distribution for all samples. After normalization, a pool is made with the same volume of each sample and qPCR is used for quantification purposes; this step validates and determines the final concentration of the pool. It was performed using KAPA Library Quantification kit for Illumina. To introduce sequencing complexity, a heterogeneous control, the phi-X phage, was combined with the amplicon pool. Finally, denaturing the libraries and phi-X was performed to allow sequencing. Sequencing was performed using the MiSeq equipment (Illumina), with paired readings of 250 pb (2 × 250pb).

Data were analyzed as previously described by Callahan et al. [27]. After the initial processing of the sequencing data, taxonomies were assigned to each ASV (Amplicon Sequencing Variants) using a DADA2 program [28] and Silva 138 database was used as a reference. ASVs that were not classified at least up to the family level were removed, and ASVs assigned the same genus were clustered. The taxonomic classifications, and their quantifications, generated by DADA2 were imported into the Phyloseq program [29].


2.5 Performance indicators

Organic matter (measured as chemical oxygen demand - COD) and carbohydrates removal efficiencies for filtered samples (ε_COD,F; ε_C,F, respectively), applied organic loading rate (OLR_A), removed organic loading rate (OLR_R), molar productivity (MPr), and molar methane yield per removed substrate (Y) were calculated [20].


2.6 Energy production assessment on an industrial scale and economic analysis

In order to estimate the energy generated from the best operational condition studied, an approximation of the reactor to an industrial scale was performed. As a basis for the approximation, the production value of soybean molasses of a large Brazilian industry, 300 tons/d, was considered. It was also considered that approximately 72% of the molasses produced by the aforementioned industry is destined for the production of biogas. This value was determined by: (i) 18.39 kg of ethanol are produced from 190.8 kg of soybean molasses [8]. Considering an ethanol density of 789 kg/m^3, there is an equivalent volume equal to 23.31 L of ethanol produced; and (ii) such industry used 3,695,748 L of ethanol in 2020 [30].

Thus, the amount of soybean molasses needed to make up the ethanol demand of this industry is equal to 30,251 tons/year. Knowing that this industry produces 109,500 tons/year of molasses, the molasses that remains to be destined to biogas production is 72%. The concentration of raw soybean molasses was 1310 g-COD/L. The methodology for this analysis and energy production estimate is extensive and has been published in Lovato et al. [31].

Estimates of the total invested capital and their associated potential returns were calculated considering the long-term financial benefits from burning the biogas in a thermoelectric plant to produce energy. The Chemical Engineering Plant Cost Index (CEPCI), which was updated for the year 2022, was used to estimate the expenses for the reactors, tanks, and pumps in order to calculate the total equipment cost (E_C). The market values of reactors/diaphragm pumps and tanks were equal to 424.20 USD/m^3 and 334.90 USD/unit, respectively. The Lang Global Factor Method was used to calculate the total invested and working capital [32,33]. This approach, which has errors of up to 35%, is described in detail in Paulinetti et al. [34] and Batista et al. [35]. In the Supplementary Online Material, specifics of the employed equations are supplied.

Project lifetime was set at 25 years, while depreciation (linear) was fixed at 10 years and the overall income tax rate was assumed to be 34% [36]. The net present value (NPV), internal rate of return (IRR), and payback of economic performance metrics were evaluated. The Microsoft Excel® program's financial functions were used to perform these computations. The following economic assumptions were made: (i) a market price for electricity of 125 USD/MWh [37] with a mean exchange rate of 5.23 BRL for 2022; (ii) an annual inflation rate for the market price of electricity of 6.05%; and (iii) an annual capitalization rate of 8.90% [38].


2.7 Study procedure of the conditions assessed

Ten conditions were carried out, divided in four steps (Fig. 1 ), and the experimental procedure of the reactor operation can be found in the Supplementary Online Material. The total duration of the experiment was 213 days and the average period of each condition was 20 consecutive days. In addition, the cycle length in all operational conditions was fixed at 6 h.

The composition of 80% molasses and 20% okara on mass basis was used in Condition 10. The choice for this composition between molasses and okara was based on an estimate of the production of these products by Brazilian industries in general.


3 Results and discussion

Table 2 presents the monitored parameters and performance indicators for all conditions.


3.1 Influence of feeding strategy and fill time

All conditions of Step I (88 days of operation) presented the same removal efficiencies, considering the deviation, for organic matter in the form of COD (around 92%) and of carbohydrates (99%). Despite the influent pH variation, due to reduction of the NaHCO_3/COD ratio, effluent pH remained around 7.4 for all conditions. Decreasing the NaHCO_3/COD ratio in the influent reduced the effluent bicarbonate alkalinity, but it did not cause system instability since the TVA in effluent remained low (30, 29, 33 and 28 mg/L).

The four feeding times operated achieved similar biogas production performance indicators, mainly conditions 3 and 4. Despite the worst percentage of methane in the biogas of Condition 3 (76%), it showed better COD removal, such that, combined with better methane yield per removed substrate, it resulted in a higher productivity (38.4 mol-CH_4/m^3/d). The increase in fill time up to 180 min favored the production of methane.

Except for the amount of intermediate acids, neither the feeding strategy nor the fill time much affected the monitored parameters, with condition 3 (180 min) exhibiting the greatest results. The similarity between the results found, therefore, denotes the reactor's flexibility in terms of operating mode. The choice of the fed-batch mode was also based on its greater proximity to the operation on an industrial scale, since the increase in reactor volume tends to approximate the operation of a fed-batch mode. This factor occurs due to the difficulty of feeding large amounts of volume in short periods of time.


3.2 Influence of applied organic loading rate

During Step II, the reactor was operated for 83 days. The organic matter removal efficiency was unaffected by the increase in organic load from 6 to 10 kg-COD/m³/d. However, increasing from 10 to 15 and then to 20 kg-COD/m^3/d resulted in a decrease in this parameter, so that conditions 3, 5, 6 and 7 showed average removal efficiencies of COD of 93, 92, 86 and 81%, respectively. However, a high carbohydrates removal was observed in all conditions of Step II (around 98%).

Regarding the stability aspect, the increase in the OLR_A resulted in an increase in the volatile acids concentration. For the highest load assessed, 20 kg-COD/m^3/d, the reactor presented excessive acidification, so the performance worsened day after day, including removal efficiency, productivity, and methane yield, a similar behavior was observed in the work of Lima et al. [39].

The production of biogas increased in response to an increase in COD concentration, which was emphasized in conditions 6 and 7 even more. The percentage of methane in biogas was the same in all conditions, considering the standard deviation. Condition 6 achieved the best overall performance. Therefore, the increase in the OLR_A tends to increase biogas production. On the other hand, once there is an excessive increase in the substrate concentration, it may result in a drop in the yield (the same pattern was observed in Siqueira et al. [40], treating vinasse), either by imposing excess substrate or by lack of sufficient reaction time. Several factors affect the tolerable organic load, for instance, biomass retained at the reactor, mass transfer, biodegradability of the substrate, temperature, toxicity, pH, and reactor configuration [41].

Rodrigues et al. [42] evaluated methane production using soybean molasses as feedstock in an Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) reactor at 25 °C. Six different OLR_A ranging from 0.28 to 6.98 kg-COD/m^3/d (500–4000 mg-COD/L) were assessed. At the highest load value, the reactor started to present a decrease in biogas production and methane yield (356.1 mL-CH_4/g-COD and 75.5% of methane). Additionally, the total COD removal efficiency was less than 80% and resulted in a low methane production.

The results achieved in this study are notable. At 14.9 kg-COD/m³/d, a value considered high for mesophilic systems, the reactor presented great results of COD removal efficiency and methane productivity, bringing together the environmental compliance of the wastewater and the possibility of energy recovery.


3.3 Influence of temperature

During Step III, the reactor was operated for 61 days. Increasing the temperature from 30 to 35 °C did not result in loss of organic matter removal efficiency (in fact, it caused an increase of 2% in this parameter). Decreasing the temperature to 25 °C diminished organic matter removal efficiency. Carbohydrates did not show any variation.

The increase in temperature from 30 to 35 °C presented the same variation of bicarbonate alkalinity, under the same NaHCO_3/COD ratio, and resulted in a decrease in the concentration of total volatile acids in the system. The opposite effect was observed from 35 to 25 °C, so that the temperature of 25 °C still resulted in a higher average concentration of acids in the effluent than that observed at 30, and mainly, at 35 °C.

The reduction in temperature was already expected to reduce methane production. According to Speece [41], in the conversion of acetate to methane, the reduction in temperature from 35 to 25 °C increases the Monod constant (K_S) from 164 to 930 mg/L, value of substrate concentration for which the specific growth rate, for a specific condition, is equal to 50% of its maximum value. In this way, the growth rate of acetoclastic archaea is reduced.

Sousa et al. [43] also studied the temperature variation (25, 30, and 35 °C) in an AnSBBR with recirculation of the liquid phase in the treatment of 75% vinasse and 25% cheese whey at 15 kg-COD/m^3/d. The reactor showed a decrease in organic matter removal efficiency from 89 to 78%, considering filtered samples, an increase in the concentration of total volatile acids from 515 to 1426 mg-HA_C/L and lower productivity from 208.5 to 176.4 mol-CH_4/m^3/d, with decreasing temperature. The best performance was achieved at 30 °C.

Reducing the temperature to 25 °C reduced the organic matter removal efficiency, increased the concentration of acids in the effluent, and decreased the production of methane, thus disfavoring the reactor performance, but not to the point of causing instability. Contrary to the reduction, the reactor operation at 35 °C showed no significant differences. It showed similar organic matter removal efficiency, acid content and bicarbonate alkalinity, but with a lower productivity and yield than the condition at 30 °C. Thus, it can be said that the reactor showed better performance at 30 °C, but also indicated flexibility regarding the operation at 35 °C.


3.4 Influence of co-processing

During Step IV, the reactor was operated for 37 days. The addition of okara did not result in a decrease in the organic matter removal efficiency, with condition 6 showing a slight advantage. Carbohydrates removal did not show significant variation. Co-processing improved the bicarbonate alkalinity value in the effluent, under the same NaHCO_3/COD ratio, and resulted in a decrease in the total volatile acids concentration in the system.

The addition of okara considerably impaired the daily production of biogas and methane and the composition of methane in biogas. Condition 6 achieved an average volume of methane per cycle of 2035 mL and 74% of methane in the biogas. Condition 10 achieved an average volume of methane per cycle of 1360 mL and 65% methane. The lower production of biogas decreased both productivity and methane yield in condition 10, proving that the AD of lignocellulosic residues is much more difficult than that of soybean molasses only.

The nature and composition of the lignocellulosic biomass, like okara, hamper the ability of microorganisms to break it down into sugars and thus the potential for a high yield of biogas through the AD process is minimized. Therefore, a pre-treatment step would be required to disintegrate the lignocellulosic biomass composition to increase its biodegradability [44].

The Supplementary Online Material presents simplified stoichiometry, kinetics, and thermodynamic analyses regarding the biochemical reactions identified in the experimental conditions, which were too extensive to be published in the main manuscript and were not the main focus of this study.

From the theoretical stoichiometry, 67% of the methane produced came from acetic acid consumption while 33% came from H_2 consumption. The methane production rate was higher by the acetoclastic route in most conditions, apart from C1 and C7, in which the methane production rate was higher by the hydrogenotrophic route. Only two reactions were considered thermodynamically unfavorable (ΔG > 0): conversion of propionic and butyric acids into acetic acid, indicating that the formation of products in these reactions was unfavorable at concentrations obtained at the end of the cycle of this operating condition. Both methanogenic pathways in standard condition are spontaneous (ΔG° < 0) and remained so under the conditions found at the end of the cycle.


3.5 Microbial community diversity

The soybean molasses is a complete substrate, containing sugars, proteins and lipids. These need to be fully converted into substrates ultimately used by the methanogens in the very last stage of AD. Characterizing the microbial community and identifying the hydrolytic and acetogens, who play a crucial role in the initial and mandatory AD steps, is of great interest and gives a great picture of the interspecies relationship and the synergism's importance for the entire system's performance. This section is dedicated to the characterization of the microbial community diversity by analyzing samples taken at the end of the following experimental conditions C6, C7, C8, C9, C10 and the inoculum (MI) (Fig. 2 ).

Every stage of AD is driven by a unique functional group. The process starts by the action of hydrolytic microorganisms breaking down the organic matter into fermentable substrates. These microorganisms are phylogenetically diverse; however, the phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroides contains the majority of the hydrolytic bacteria found in AD bioreactors [45]. The results show an abundance of microorganisms belonging to the phylum Firmicutes in all samples; Bacteroides related microorganisms were also identified (Macellibacteroides) in certain conditions (C6, C7, C8, C9).

The most abundant genera observed in the experiments and belonging to Firmicutes phylum were Trichococcus, Acetobacterium, Christensenellaceae R-7 group, Enterococcus (only in C10), Butyricicoccus and Clostridium (mainly in the inoculum) (Fig. 2). The inoculum was Trichococcus-rich; this microorganism participates in both hydrolysis and acidogenesis stages of AD [46]. Despite its metabolic versatility, its percentage dropped along the experimental period suggesting that either the operational conditions or the substrate composition had a negative impact on its growth. The starter culture (MI) used in the present study is known for its methanogenic capability. The abundance of this genus and the findings of Doloman et al. [47], that the addition of T. flocculiformis to co-cultures (S. wolfei and a methanogens) led to an increase in the volumetric methane production, suggests that this genus is crucial to the AD process.

The presence of Acetobacterium taxa-related microorganisms was observed in all analyzed samples (C6–C10) except in the inoculum (MI) (Fig. 2). It suggests that the soybean molasses could also act as inoculum. Moreover, since the inoculation process occurred just once and at the beginning of the experiments, the microorganism present in the substrate solution, that is continuously fed into the reactor, might account as an important inoculum source. Acetobacterium genus is capable of fermenting a variety of sugars producing acetic acid. However, under strict anaerobic conditions they exhibit a carbon-fixing Wood-Ljungdahl pathway converting H_2 and CO_2 into acetate. For this reason, acetogens play an important role in hydrogen cycling during organic matter breakdown into CH_4. Metabolic shifts occur with environmental conditions changes, A. woodii can grow fermentatively in co-culture with methanogens or compete with them by producing acetate from H_2 and CO_2 [48]. According to the referred author, A. woodii cells couple the oxidative and reductive metabolic reactions cycling hydrogen internally, in a process termed as “intracellular syntrophy”. Microorganisms related to this taxon were found in all analyzed samples, especially in C7 in which the highest HAc concentration was observed.

Another Firmicutes, the Christensenellaceae R-7 group, a fermentative and obligately anaerobic, populated the bioreactor (Fig. 2). These microorganisms are capable of fermenting simple sugars into volatile fatty acids (VFA). The Christensenellaceae family presence has been reported in human microbial gut ecology studies. Its co-occurrence with Methanobacteriaceae family has been reported and it may be a H_2-based syntrophy [49]. Still among the Firmicutes members, the presence of Enterococcus related microorganisms was observed only in C10 (Fig. 2). This was the only experimental condition in which the co-processing of soybean molasses and okara was assessed. The claimed prebiotic potential of okara may have contributed to the enrichment of Enterococcus [50].

As a result of operational parameters changes (from C6 to C10), an enrichment of Syner 1 genus occurred (Fig. 2). Ito et al. [51] observed acetate uptake by Synergistes group 4 cells growing along with Methanosaeta. The shortage of substrate could be at the first sight a concern when the co-occurrence of both microorganisms is observed; however, instead, it seems to be a cooperative interaction, as the Synergistes are more competitive at high acetate concentration, balancing its level and avoiding an unfavorable environment for the methane-producers [52]. The enrichment of acetate oxidizers might have been triggered by HAc concentration increase (Table 2; C6 through C10). Also, butyrate and propionate-consumers in anaerobic digesters is greatly desired as those end-products cannot be used by methanogens; however, they are generated during acidogenesis and its accumulation are often associated with methane production instability [53].

Moving to a different phylum, as a trend, it was observed an enrichment and selection of Proteobacteria taxonomy as the experiments were carried out. The most abundant genera were Blastochloris and Rhodopseudomonas (Figure in Supplementary Online Material).

Both Blastochloris and Rhodopseudomonas comprise the purple non-sulfur metabolic versatile bacteria. Depending on the environmental condition they grow heterotrophically fermenting carbohydrates producing acids, H_2 and CO_2, but are also capable of using light as an energy source growing photoheterotrophically. Furthermore, Rhodopseudomonas has been recently described to be capable of CO_2 fixation in the dark when growing in a co-culture with G. metallireducens. The latter acts providing the reducing power and energy for the dark CO_2 fixation in this electrosyntrophy [54]. Given the World concerns with the greenhouse gases emissions, this finding is of great interest and points out the potential of these microbes in the carbon cycling. In light of the observation of a brown-reddish biomass on the transparent feed reservoir wall (Figure in Supplementary Online Material) and the lack of Rhodopseudomonas genus in the inoculum, we hypothesize that those are soybean molasses endogenous microorganisms.

Zooming into the Archaea Domain, Methanobacterium was the most abundant identified genus in the inoculum (MI). Its relative abundance decreased over time and it ended up being similar to Methanosaeta's relative abundance. Despite the use of a methanogenic sludge as culture started, it's necessary to point out that the substrate endogenous microorganism, that were constantly fed into the reactor, might have been an important microbial fount. Bioaugmentation seems to be an attractive strategy to reintroduce into the reactor the most vulnerable microorganisms that may have been inhibited and washed out. The introduction of certain microorganisms, participating in any of the AD mandatory stages, has been applied with success [55].

Nevertheless, less abundant microorganisms related to phyla Bacteroidota, Chlorofexi, Euryarchaeota, Halobacterota, Synergistota were also identified. However, Firmicutes and Proteobacteria together accounted for at least 69% of the community microbial relative abundance. The graph depicting each phyla's relative abundance in all samples can be found in Supplementary Online Material.


3.6 Energy production assessment on an industrial scale

The energy production estimation was calculated using the results obtained at Condition 6. The industrial data were obtained from a big-size Brazilian industry that generates 216 tons of soybean molasses per day with a concentration of 1310 g-COD/L.

A 29,438 m^3 AnSBBR reactor was estimated to carry out the AD of soybean molasses in an industrial design context defined in proportional terms to condition 6. The system's liquid medium volume, V_R-IND, would be 16,638 m^3, its residual volume, V_RES-IND, 16,598 m^3, its fed volume, V_F-IND, 40 m^3 per cycle and its inert support + biomass, V_I+B-IND, 12,800 m^3. However, to make a viable estimate of an industrial reactor volume, a nine AnSBBR reactors configuration of 3271 m³ each V_T-IND operated in parallel was adopted, with V_R-IND equal to 1849 m^3, V_RES-IND equal to 1844 m³, V_F-IND equal to 5 m³ per cycle and V_I + B-IND equal to 1422 m^3 each reactor. It is important to note that the dilution of the raw influent concentration to 10.12 g-COD/L, in order to maintain laboratory conditions and guarantee a low concentration of volatile intermediate acids, would be carried out inside the reactor, maintaining, therefore, a large residual volume inside it. Figs. 3 and 4 show the configuration of the nine AnSBBR on an industrial scale and the zooming into the configuration of only one AnSBBR, also on an industrial scale. Such distribution allows a continuous production of methane, since the process operates with successive stages of feeding, reaction, and discharge, guaranteeing a continuous operation mode even with a set of discontinuous reactors. In this way, there will always be at least three reactors being fed, another three being discharged and three more reactors promoting only the biochemical reactions.

In order to estimate the energy production generated by the system on an industrial scale, the results of removed organic loading rate and methane yield on a laboratory scale from Condition 6, and the volume of liquid medium in the reactor, obtained on the scale-up estimation were considered. The system of nine AnSBBR reactors has the capacity to produce approximately 2.33 × 10^6 mol-CH_4/d or 52 × 10^3 m^3-CH_4/d and generate a power of approximately 22 MW, considering a methane combustion enthalpy of 802.6 kJ/mol.

Since the scale-up estimation and energy production considered a soybean molasses production of a real Brazilian industry, it was calculated, therefore, how much methane produced would be enough to supply the diesel and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) demand in steam generation processes. The industry in question consumes 249,891 and 645,850 L of diesel and LPG per year, respectively [30]. Therefore, the values of 3.07 × 10^4 and 5.74 × 10^4 mol-CH_4/d would be consumed to supply the demand of diesel and LPG, respectively, representing approximately 4% of the total biogas production. Thus, 96% of the methane generated by the system would be directed to the production of electricity in the industry itself.

The system has the capacity to generate 22 MW of power (thermal energy), of which 20.8 MW (96%) would be destined for conversion into electricity. Assuming a conversion efficiency to electricity of 40% [56], it is possible to generate 72 GWh/year of electricity, which can be sold to electricity companies.


3.7 Economic analysis

The economic analysis was performed considering: (i) nine reactors; (ii) three feed pumps (for common use by the reactors); (iii) three discharge pumps (for common use by the reactors); (iv) nine recirculation pumps (one for each reactor); (v) two storage tanks (in case of need for maintenance); and (vi) three spare pumps. Table 3 presents the equipment costs used, the total cost of equipment, installation, instrumentation and controls, piping and valves, electricity and engineering, the so-called direct and indirect costs of the plant, and the values associated with the savings with diesel and LPG, and electricity sales. According to Table 3, the initial cost of installing nine AnSBBR reactors in the treatment of soybean molasses for methane production along with other expenses, on an industrial scale, the NPV value, IRR, and payback time is around USD 61 M, USD 39 M, 14.0%, and 13.8 years, respectively. The project is unfeasible when the IRR is lower than the capitalization rate (8.90%). As a result, it can be stated that the implementation of the proposed project is feasible.

The results from this study can be compared to a project of Raízen, a major Brazilian energy company active in the manufacture of sugar and ethanol production, as well as in the distribution of fuel and energy generation. Raízen opened in October 2020 a biogas plant. The enterprise, located in São Paulo, is one of the largest biogas plants in the world, with 21 MW of installed capacity in the treatment of vinasse and filter cake, both by-products obtained in the processing of ethanol from sugarcane.

The unit has a crushing capacity of more than 5 × 10^6 tons-cane/year and a production in the order of 138 × 10^3 MWh. The plant of 36.3 ha and 153.1 × 10^3 m^2 of built area had an initial investment of BRL 153 million [57], which is equal to USD 30 M, approximately. Thus, it can be noticed that the initial investment value obtained in this work, but for 2022, has the same order of magnitude as the implemented investment. It is important to point out that the estimate does not account for certain expenses, such as: gas purification, alkalizing agent and inert support acquisition, and royalties.


4 Conclusions

The anaerobic digestion of soybean molasses conducted in an AnSBBR presented satisfactory results at all assessed conditions. Increasing fill time presented no substantial influence on the monitored parameters, except for the amount of intermediate acids, with better performance of the condition with 180-min feed. Increasing the OLR_A tends to increase the biogas production, but it reduces the process yield. Reducing temperature to 25 °C decreased the COD removal efficiency, increased the acids concentration, and decreased methane production and yield, impairing reactor performance. The reactor operation at 35 °C also caused reduction in methane productivity and yield in relation to operation at 30 °C. The co-processing significantly decreased methane productivity and yield. At an OLR_A of 14.9 kg-COD/m^3/d, the reactor achieved a soluble COD removal efficiency of 86%, methane productivity of 140.9 mol-CH_4/m^3/d, methane yield of 11.0 mol-CH_4/kg-COD or 246 mL-CH_4/g-COD, and 74% of methane in biogas.

Microorganisms responsible for the initial steps of organic matter breakdown, such as members of the Firmicutes and Proteobacteria phyla , were dominant (at least 67%). These versatile metabolic genera phyla groups participated in hydrolysis and acetogenesis, but also include those who can compete with methanogens by consuming H_2 and CO_2 (Acetobacterium). As the methanogen abundance dropped throughout the experiments, bioaugmentation might be an interesting strategy in maintaining a high level of this functional group inside the reactor for its refinement.

Nine AnSBBR reactors with 3271 m³ each were configured in parallel to process 216 tons/day of soybean molasses at an energy output rate of 72 GWh/year. An economic assessment of the soybean molasses project was conducted based on these values, and the results showed an overall investment of approximately USD 61 M with NPV, IRR and payback equal to USD 39 M, 14.0%, and 13.8 years, respectively.


 Credit author statement

Ana Paula Paulinetti: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Lia Paula Poloni Batista: Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing – review & editing. Carol Zampol Lazaro: Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing – review & editing. Roberta Albanez: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. Suzana Maria Ratusznei: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing. Giovanna Lovato: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation, Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition. José Alberto Domingues Rodrigues: Resources, Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Project administration.


Appendix A Supplementary data

The following is the Supplementary data to this article:


Appendix A Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2023.128061.