TITLE: Soybean molasses as feedstock for sustainable generation of biomethane using high-rate anaerobic reactor


1 Introduction

Soybean production occupies a significant part of the world’s arable land (94.1 million ha), being one of the major oilseed crops throughout America and Asia [1]. The soybean chain includes the agricultural production and industrial processing stages until its use as edible oil or biodiesel and livestock feed [2]. However, one of the greatest issues involved in soybean processing is the number of byproducts or wastes produced that do not have an effective commercial value, being inappropriately disposed on watercourses and soil or burned [3].

The soybean molasses is the main byproduct generated at the industrial processing of soybean to produce the soy protein concentrate. Unlike the soybean wastewater, soybean molasses is a viscous liquid residue (semi-solid) that has environmental disposal problems. According to [4], soy protein concentrate (72% of protein) is the result of removal of the oil and water-soluble non-protein constituents, such as soluble carbohydrates and salts. Soybean molasses is the result of extraction of sugars from de-oiled soybean meal. For each ton of soybean meal, 768.1 kg of soybean concentrate and 231.9 kg of soybean molasses are produced in industrial process [5]. The soybean molasses production flowchart is presented in Fig. 1.

Soybean molasses has already been studied by researchers and industries due to its rich composition in carbohydrates [6]. Therefore, many researches emphasize its rich sugars concentration by focusing on fermentative processes to generate value-added products as butanol, lactic acid, xanthan gum, malic acid [7–10] and recovery of residual lecithin as emulsifier [11]. Some industries have been utilizing soybean molasses as the substrate for bioethanol production [12,13], but due to the high generation of molasses, it is also used as source of energy, burning it on industrial boilers.

The greatest difficulty in using this by-product is due to the presence of polysaccharides and oligosaccharides, such as raffinose and stachyose (40% total carbohydrates), which are not readily available for fermentable processes. Pretreatments or hydrolysis (acidic, basic, enzymatic, and physical-chemical) are needed to release the fermentable sugars. Therefore, investments in industrial facilities are required, limiting the use of raw soy molasses for industrial applications [7]. Thus, soybean molasses has low added value, due to the lack of effective and large-scale methodologies for applications that result in the valorization and sustainable employability of this by-product.

Due to the high costs, especially required to pretreatments, and low yields associated with chemical processes, low-cost alternatives, such as anaerobic digestion (AD), can offer a practical and sustainable solution for soybean molasses. As a sustainable biotechnology, AD is unique in that it both reduces waste and produces an energy resource in the biogas (biomethane). Not only does this biotechnology have a positive net energy production but also the generated biogas can replace fossil fuel; therefore, it has a positive effect on greenhouse gas reduction.

AD has been receiving renewed interest because it offers an alternative source of energy as convert organic and readily biodegradable residues from diverse sources into biomethane, which can be used as bioenergy source, providing heat, electricity, and an alternative to natural gas after purification and upgrading [14].

All high-rate anaerobic reactors are based on the concept of retaining high viable biomass by some mode of sludge immobilization [15]. The AD process can be commonly carried out in reactors such as the Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Bed reactor (UASB). Among the high-rate anaerobic reactors configuration, the UASB process has achieved great success and this reactor has been applied to treat a wide range of wastes such as sewage, sugar, pulp and paper, dairy, chemical, potato starch, bean balancing, soft drinks, fish processing, noodle processing, yeast production, slaughterhouse, and coffee processing industries [16]. In addition to reactor versatility for the treatment of wastewater, UASB reactors stand out for facilitating the collection of biogas and for supporting high organic loads in low HRT [17].

The main drawback of the UASB process is the slow start-up in the absence of inoculum. Commonly, granular sludge from existing reactors is used to inoculate reactors, but a long acclimation period is often required, delaying the biogas generation [18]. According to [19], a presence of granular biomass in the UASB reactor has proved it capable of treating high-strength wastes and/or contaminated with organic industrial pollutants, including toxic and recalcitrant compounds.

According to our best knowledge, there is no study on the generation of biogas (anaerobic digestion) from raw soybean molasses as sustainable biotechnology alternative or for avoiding environmental disposal problems. In this paper, it has been demonstrated that soybean molasses can be used efficiently as the sole carbon source to produce biogas by using a consolidated and widely known high-rate anaerobic technology. In future, the novelty of the proposal would be interesting for the industries producing soy protein as main alternative to burning in boilers.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Substrate (soybean molasses)

The raw soybean molasses was received from a soybean-processing industry in the concentrated form and kept in a temperature-controlled (25 ± 3 °C) room. The soybean molasses is rich in carbohydrates, i.e., it consists of about 65% mono and disaccharide and about 35% oligosaccharides, mainly, raffinose (5–7%) and stachyose (30–32%). The high percentage of mono and disaccharide (organic source) present in molasses make it an appropriate substrate for biodegradation in anaerobic digestion. In terms of COD for each gram of soybean molasses (8 samples) it was determined a mean concentration of 570 ± 33 mg L^−1.

The UASB reactor was fed with substrate (soybean molasses) that was diluted in public water supply (20 L). The dilution was necessary due the high viscosity of the molasses (9000–14,000 cP) and to reach the COD concentrations to be applied in the reactor (Periods I–VI). Sodium bicarbonate (1–4 g L^−1) was added for buffering of substrate due to soybean molasses presenting low value of pH (5.45).


2.2 UASB reactor and operation

A Plexiglas lab-scale UASB reactor was confectioned for this research ( Fig. 2). The total volume of the reactor was 12 L with an effective height of 82.0 cm and diameter of 12.25 cm. The reactor presented three sections: (1) sludge blanket zone with 12.25 cm diameter and 60.2 cm height, (2) settling tank zone with 18.62 cm diameter and 19.2 cm height and (3) gas-liquid-solid zone with a separator gas device (GLS) installed inside of the settling zone. The GLS (glass inverted funnel) was interconnected with a hydraulic seal (Erlenmeyer – 1 L). A peristaltic pump (Grundfus DDE 6-10B) fed the reactor with the diluted soybean molasses.

Biogas production (mL d^−1) was measured based on the liquid displacement principle. A new biogas meter was developed to satisfy the need for an adjustable for low biogas flow. The device consists of “U”-shaped glass tube connected with “J”-shaped glass solenoid valve. Potassium iodate was selected as the displaced liquid and as salt bridge. One port of the glass tube is connected to the hydraulic seal and in the other one two titanium electrodes were inserted. They were connected to an Arduino board for counting liquid displacements. The design of the biogas meter device was based according to [20,21].

The device was constructed with measurement biogas flow between 120 and 3500 mL d^−1. This range of biogas flow was calculated based on the minimum and maximum COD concentration applied (500–4000 mgCOD L^−1) according to the theoretical biogas production described by de Lemos Chernicharo [22].

This study was carried out for the assessment of a lab-scale UASB reactor for optimization of organic loading rate (OLR) and HRT (hydraulic retention time) in several operational Periods (I-VI). The experimental apparatus was located in room exposed at ambient temperature (25 ± 3°C). In Table 1, the operational parameters planned for UASB reactor (experimental phase) are presented.

One of the major problems that occurs in the application of anaerobic digestion to wastewater or wastes is the start-up procedures. The start-up period is crucial for the specific establishment of the microbial population required for anaerobic treatment. In this case, the reactor was fed with low COD concentration (Period I - 500 mg L^−1) and high HRT (48 h) because it is a substrate not known for anaerobic digestion. It is emphasized that the Period I was considered a period of adaptation and acclimatization of granular anaerobic biomass to the substrate (soybean molasses). Along the experimental phase, the added amount of raw soybean molasses in the substrate was being adjusted gradually with reduction of HRT in function of the COD removal efficiencies and low VFA concentration in the effluent of UASB reactor (stable condition).


2.3 UASB reactor monitoring

The monitoring of the UASB reactor (134 days) was carried out through physical-chemical analysis (influent and effluent samples), such as pH, Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) Total and Filtered (membrane 1.2 µm), Total Suspended Solids (TSS) and Volatile Suspended Solids (VSS) according to [23]. Determinations of Volatile Fatty Acids (VFA) as acetic acid (H_AC) and Bicarbonate Alkalinity (BA) followed the methodology described by DiLallo and Albertson [24] modified by Ripley et al. [25], respectively. The samples for the monitoring (physical-chemical analysis) of the UASB (influent and effluent) had been collected in alternating days.

Quantification of the biomass concentration in the anaerobic inoculum was evaluated by analysis of Total Solids (TS) and Total Volatile Solids (TVS) according [23].

After the calibrations of U-tube meter, biogas production was quantified for the several periods of UASB operation (Table 1). Under stable condition of operation, temporal profiles of biogas sampling were carried out each 2 h for 24 h which substrate concentrations were of 500–4000 mgCOD L^−1. Methane concentrations in biogas were evaluated through gas chromatography (GC) and was performed in a Shimadzu gas chromatography (GC 2014 model), with thermal conductivity detector and a HP-PLOT column (30 m x 0.53 mm × 40 µm) according to [26]. Hydrogen was used as a carrier gas at a flow rate of 15 mL min^−1. The temperatures of the injection port, oven and detector were 160 °C, 35 °C and 170 °C, respectively. The gas sample of 0.5 mL was injected in duplicate.


2.4 Inoculum

The lab-scale UASB reactor was inoculated with 3.5 L of anaerobic granular sludge (28.5 gTS L^−1 and 24.4 gTVS L^−1). The anaerobic sludge was collected from a UASB reactor used at the Poultry Wastewater Treatment Plant (Dakar - Tietê/SP - Brazil).


3 Results and discussion


3.1 UASB performance

The UASB reactors seeded with granular sludge can give high performance within a rapid start-up period and can also adapt rapidly to increase of OLR [27]. In this case, the reactor start-up operation (COD ~ 500 mg L^−1 or OLR ~ 0.25 kg m^−3 d^−1) was relatively fast in the acclimatization period (Period I) with a non-adapted granular sludge, achieving removal efficiencies of 90% (COD_Total) and 94% (COD_Filtered) ( Fig. 3). The mean values of total and filtered effluent COD obtained after 52 days were 75 ± 18 mg L^−1 and 107 ± 23 mg L^−1, respectively. It was also noted the small difference between values of COD_Total and COD_Filtered and these low values did not indicate the occurrence of loss biomass in start-up period.

A certain amount of macro-and micronutrients is required for the growth and maintenance of the biomass, the effects of high nutrients levels on start-up of the anaerobic process must also be taken into consideration. Excess concentrations are inhibitory rather than stimulatory to degradation process [28,29]. In this study, macro- or micronutrient supplementation has not been needed for anaerobic digestion of soybean molasses. Soybean molasses has the nutrients in quantities necessary for the development of the anaerobic digestion process ( Table 2).

Table 3 shows the average values of the monitored parameters of UASB reactor during 134 days (Period I-VI) for different organic loading rates and COD concentrations (influent). Organic loading rates (OLR) varying from 0.28 to 6.98 kg COD m^−3 d^−1 achieved the maximum Organic removal rate (ORR) of 4.89 kg COD m^−3 d^−1 (Period VI) (Table 4).

In general, the UASB performance was satisfactory because pseudo-steady states were reached at a short period after operational changes of HRT and OLR with an average COD_Filtered removal in Periods II, III, IV, V and VI of 85%, 84%, 88%, 88%, 83% and 75%, respectively ( Table 4). The COD removal improvement over the periods may be attributed to the gradual acclimatization and adaptation of the granular sludge to the substrate [31]. The mean values of COD_Total concentration of the effluent were 189 ± 42 mg L^−1 (II), 326 ± 100 mg L^−1 (III), 387 ± 88 mg L^−1 (IV), 899 ± 340 mg L^−1 (V) and 1219 ± 131 mg L^−1 (VI).

The results, at the end of each period, indicated an optimum range for organic loading rate (0.28–3.91 kg m^−3 d^−1) at all conditions (OLR and HRT) with COD_Total removal efficiency between 77% and 83% in UASB reactor (Period I-V). In this case, the optimum HRT for influent COD_Total concentration of 4000 mg L^−1 (OLR = 3.91 ± 0.22 kg m^−3 d^−1) can be established with 24 h for anaerobic digestion of diluted soybean molasses (Period V).

In the Period VI, a decrease of HRT (12 h) influenced the reactor's operational stability. The mean COD removal efficiencies of UASB reactor also decreases to values around 70% (Table 4). Higher upflow velocity can reduce the contact time between sludge and substrate in addition to smashing of sludge granules and resultantly higher washout of biomass. The upflow velocity is important in providing adequate mixing of the substrate and biomass without channeling and maintaining the HRT [17]. The allowable limit of upflow velocity is 0.5–1.5 m h^−1 as reported by different researchers [22,32]. The success of anaerobic digestion of soybean molasses in UASB reactor was the utilization of upflow velocity from 0.018 to 0.033 m h^−1 to HRT around 24 h.

The TSS and VSS concentration observed in the effluent were likely related to the washout of solids (biomass). For the Period VI, the highest mean concentrations of 171 ± 14 mgTSS L^−1 and 154 ± 15 mgVSS L^−1 were achieved with HRT of 12 h and upflow velocity of 0.058 m h^−1 (OLR = 6.98 ± 0.35 kg m^−3 d^−1). These high values do indicate the occurrence of biomass detachment and consequently the reduction of COD removal efficiencies. In contrast, the low concentration of TSS and VSS in Periods I and II in the effluent (~ 30 mg L^−1) are possibly related with high biomass retention inside the reactor. The effluent of the UASB reached the average concentrations of 32 ± 15 mgTSS L^−1 and 33 ± 7 mgVSS L^−1 in Period I, while in Period II of 37 ± 7 mgTSS L^−1 and 34 ± 12 mgVSS L^−1 (Table 4). The average suspended solid concentrations of the effluent obtained in others Periods were 73 ± 39 mgTSS L^−1 and 65 ± 38 mgVSS L^−1 (III), 87 ± 28 mgTSS L^−1 and 81 ± 22 mgVSS L^−1 (IV) and 120 ± 60 mgTSS L^−1 and 102 ± 56 mgVSS L^−1 (V) (Table 4).

In the Period VI, it was observed adhesion of insoluble compounds from soybean molasses (Table 2), i.e., crude protein and fats to the surface of the granules, which may difficult the diffusion of the substrate to the interior of the granule. Couras et al. [33] evaluated the influence of OLR (HRT and COD) from dairy wastewater (high fat and protein content), with applied OLR of 2.5–10.0 kgDQOm^−3 d^−1. The authors observed loss of granular sludge attributed to the combined effect of the high upflow velocity (HRT = 6 h) and the presence of feed substrate compounds adhered to the granules surface in UASB reactor, which also reduced the COD removal efficiency and biogas generation. These operational conditions may justify the loss of biomass and reduced efficiency occurred during Period VI, since there was no accumulation of excess AVT in relation to the previous Periods (Table 4).

A significant amount of VFA (as acetic acid) was generated in the influent due to diluted substrate degradation along experimental Periods (96 ± 27 mgHac L^−1 to 873 ± 141 mgHac L^−1) (Table 3). The presence of high carbohydrate concentrations (glucose, sucrose and fructose) that are rapidly degraded implied in the generation of high VFA concentration in the diluted soybean molasses prepared with 20 L (public water supply). Thus, the increase of the amount of sodium bicarbonate was effective in alkalinity generation (BA) and substrate buffering at pH values which varied between 7.3 and 7.7.

The generation of BA and low VFA obtained values can be considered as an indication of balance between methanogenesis and acidogenesis phases [34]. The VFA values (effluent) had been 81 ± 21 mgHac L^−1 to 272 ± 135 mgHac L^−1, while BA values had been of 201 ± 29 mgCaCO_3 L^−1 and 2112 ± 50 mgCaCO_3 L^−1 (Period I-VI) (Table 4). Additionally, the effluent pH remained at levels considered adequate for anaerobic digestion, ranging from 7.6 to 7.9 throughout the experimental phase.

However, dilution of soybean molasses to appropriate COD concentrations with public water supply also was required to improve product dissolution (high viscosity) (Table 2). In this case, a large amount of water is necessary for dilution. Alternatively, for future studies the liquid for dilution of the molasses feedstock can be reused from the effluent, based on these preliminary results (Table 4). This will result in a decreased need for water addition with only the eventual replacement due to losses in the process. The effluent reuse implies the presence of BA for adjusting pH on the reactor feed. Therefore, the addition of sodium bicarbonate would not be necessary.

These preliminary results allow us to propose the upfront dilution strategy based on the high-rate anaerobic process with other soybean processing wastewaters to dilute the incoming influent (soybean molasses). Another alternative is to use soybean molasses as a co-substrate with other agro-wastes and/or wastewater as complementary substrate to improve biogas generation through co-digestion.


3.2 Evaluation of biogas production (biomethane) through temporal profiles

Biomethane potential assays were performed in order to measure the biogas production from anaerobic digestion of soybean molasses, they were performed using the "U" tube meter. The measurements had been carried through the UASB reactor after operational stability, i.e., when the COD removal efficiencies did not present significant variation in the different experimental periods (I-VI). In each experimental period, temporal profiles were performed with sampling for 24 h in several days. The biogas samples were collected from of the hydraulic seal every 4 h. Then, methane concentration was evaluated by gas chromatography. Table 5 presents the mean values of biogas production and methane concentration profiles for several periods of UASB operation.

The high methane concentration in the biogas (75.5–82.1%) obtained on the temporal profiles had demonstrated the feasibility of converting soybean molasses into biomethane by anaerobic digestion. According to [35], for the biogas production of high-quality energy in an anaerobic reactor, the methane concentration values must be between 65% and 85%. Additionally, no H_2S gas, besides CH_4 and CO_2, was detected on the biogas. This represents that no additional costs are required for biogas purification and upgrading, which makes out this approach even more attractive to the soybean industries.

Fig. 4 presents the temporal profile of mean values of real and estimated biogas production with relationship OLR applied in UASB reactor. Results showed that both HRT and OLR influenced the process performance and biomethane yields. Maximum mean biomethane yield of 376.2 mLCH_4 gCOD^−1 was obtained at COD concentration of 4000 mg L^−1 and at an OLR of 3.91 kgCOD m^−3 d^−1 accompanied by HRT of 24 h (Period V). However, the biomethane yields were much higher (30%) than the estimated biomethane yield according to [22]. This indicates that soybean molasses waste has potential for biomethane production with the maximum biogas production related to substrate concentration of 4000 mg L^−1 (8.0 g soybean molasses L^−1), producing the mean value of 1519 ± 333 mL d^−1 (Table 5). Therefore, for each kg of soybean molasses, around 190 L d^−1 of biomethane can be generated.

An increase in OLR to 6.98 kgCOD m^−3 d^−1 in the feed and HRT of 12 h resulted in a corresponding decrease in biogas production and methane yield (356.1 mLCH_4 gCOD^−1 and 75.5% as methane) in the Period VI. Additionally, the COD_Total removals were less than 80% and resulted in a low methane production but did not result in complete anaerobic digestion failure.

Unlike soybean wastewater, soybean molasses is agro-industrial waste that was never used to biogas production according to our best knowledge. Therefore, there are no results available in the literature for the anaerobic digestion of this viscous waste. Thus, the performance obtained in this research is compared with that of lab-scale UASB reactors treating other agro-industrial byproducts (wastes or wastewaters) with high concentration of sugars or carbohydrates. In Table 6, it is shown the performance of UASB reactors (lab-scale) in anaerobic digestion of agro-industrial wastes.

Kaparaju et al. [36] investigated the anaerobic treatment of wheat straw stillage in a UASB and stated lower biogas production (154 mLCH_4 gCOD^−1) when compared with the soybean molasses biogas production while applying a higher OLR (19 kg m^−3 d^−1). On the other hand, biogas generation and biomethane yield content presented by [37,38] were comparable with the values obtained with soybean molasses waste. In studies using sugar industry wastewater [39–41], the results of COD removal can also be compared to the values obtained in this study.


4 Conclusion

The UASB reactor demonstrated to be an interesting biotechnological alternative of high-rate process and, in the future, the application on a large scale for biogas generation from soybean molasses. The present study indicated that anaerobic digestion of soybean molasses alone for biogas production (HRT of 24 h) is feasible in UASB reactor at an OLR of 3.91 kg m^−3 d^−1 and at COD concentration of 4000 mg L^−1 in the feed. Maximum biomethane yield of 376.2 mL CH4 gCOD^−1 could be obtained with a COD_Total removal efficiency of 77% (Period V). Increase in OLR to 6.98 kg m^−3 d^−1 and low HRT (12 h) for COD concentration of 4000 mg L^−1 in feed led to lower biomethane yields. Considering the effluent produced by the process, one option for its used would be the upfront dilution strategy of soybean molasses in order to reduce the addition of sodium bicarbonate and water consumption for establishment of anaerobic digestion. Further studies have to be carried out for scale-up this reactor configuration and testing in pilot-scale for anaerobic digestion of soybean molasses for biomethane production.


 CRediT authorship contribution statement

Brenda Clara Gomes Rodrigues: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, Visualization. Bruna Sampaio de Mello: Data curation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Maria Lucia Gonsales da Costa Araujo: Supervision, Writing - review & editing. Gustavo Henrique Ribeiro da Silva: Writing - review & editing. Arnaldo Sarti: Supervision, Conceptualization, Resources, Validation, Investigation, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, Project administration.