TITLE: Effects of increasing organic loading rates on reactor performance and the methanogenic community in a new pilot upflow solid reactor for continuously processing food waste


1 Introduction

The rapid growth of the world’s population and economies has contributed to an increase in the consumption of fossil fuels and more waste being produced. Many efforts have been made to find effective and low-cost methods to solve energy and environmental issues [1]. The production of biomethane via anaerobic processes is an acceptable solution for waste management because of its low cost, low production of residual waste and its utilization as a renewable energy source [2].

Food waste, one of the largest waste sources around the world, is considered to be a valuable resource for the production of biofuel [3]. Food waste is discharged from restaurants, kitchens, cafeterias and food processing plants. Globally, about 1.3 billion tons of food are lost or wasted along the food supply chain, from production to consumption [4]. In China, nearly 172 million tons of food waste was produced in 2013 and the amount of food waste is increasing year on year [5]. Anaerobic digestion (AD) has the potential to generate 367 m^3 of biogas/dry-ton at about 65% methane with an energy content of 6.25 kWh/m^3 of biogas [6]. It is possible to compensate for the energy consumption for different food categories and food production steps through the AD of food waste to bioenergy. However, additional research is needed to improve the economic performance of anaerobic digesters of food waste, to increase profit and attract more investment in this area [7].

The design of a high-performance anaerobic digester is extremely important to yield a cost-effective and economically viable means of converting ever-abundant food waste to useful energy [8]. Many types of reactor have been studied to improve the AD performance of food waste, including continuous stirred tank reactors (CSTRs) [9], anaerobic sequencing batch reactors (ASBRs) [10], upflow anaerobic sludge blanket reactors (UASBs) [11] and fixed film reactors [4]. These reactors were originally designed to treat sewage sludge and manure, which are very different from food waste with high levels of organic biodegradable material. Each reactor has drawbacks such as low efficiency, high energy demand [12], high capital investment [13], and membrane clogging [14]. To improve the yield of biogas production from food waste, traditional reactors should be modified and upgraded to adapt to the characteristics of food waste [15].

To simplify reactor operation and manage solid waste, an upflow solids reactor (USR) was developed based on a UASB [16]. USRs have many advantages compared with UASBs, including simple structure and operation, low cost, and high solids content. Although USRs have been used to treat manure wastes and crop straw (from wheat and corn) in China [17], less research on enhancing AD efficiency using this reactor configuration has been reported compared to that on other reactor types. In particular, a configuration for effective separation of hydraulic retention time (HRT) and sludge retention time (SRT) is critical for the development of a high-rate digester [18]. German researchers applied a type of USR called an upflow anaerobic solid-state (UASS) reactor to solid-state digestion [19]. Ligno-cellulosic biomass such as wheat straw was used as bedding material to form a solid-state bed (SSB). A sieve in the head of the UASS reactor served as a 3-phase separator and kept the SSB below the liquor surface. This design is not suitable for the separation of solids, liquids and gases in AD treatment of food waste because viscous solids can agglomerate and block the upflow of liquids and gases under static conditions. Such effects also impede mass transfer between microorganisms and the substrate in the UASS. Addressing these issues requires a method for the dynamic internal recycling of solids in a USR that can avoid both particle agglomeration and mechanical mixing; a new configuration could provide a new function and performance improvement for traditional reactors [20]. The proposed design can separate HRT from SRT for the AD of food waste to ensure sufficient microorganism retention. To prove the effectiveness of this design, it is necessary to gain more insight into the feasibility of AD of food waste, which could extend the application of USRs to a wider field.

The microbial community of a digester reflects its stability, treatment effectiveness and gas production capacity [21]. Understanding the composition of the bacterial populations of digesters is key to manipulating the microbial community in an anaerobic digester and can significantly improve AD efficiency and biogas production [22]. Thus, considerable efforts should be made to identify the dynamics of the microbial community in the proposed USR using molecular approaches [23].

This study aimed to develop a new pilot USR configuration with in-situ separation of liquid and solids for the AD of food waste. The methanogenic community diversity and structure were explored to understand the microbial ecology corresponding to AD with different OLRs. This study provides valuable information on the practical application of USRs for the AD of food waste.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Food waste and inoculums

Food waste, mainly composed of rice, wheat, vegetables and meat, was collected from a food waste treatment plant (Bihai Environmental Protection Technology Advisory Services Co. Ltd, Tianjin, China). The food waste was collected, and crushed in an industrial treatment. Food waste was crushed by a special food waste pulverizer. The pulverized food waste was mixed with a large amount of water for steaming to remove the oil, and then discharged into an underground storage pool for treatment, and this food waste stream was used in the present study. Anaerobic sludge was taken from an anaerobic reactor at the food waste treatment plant with total solid (TS) of 9.7% and total volatile solids (VS) of 8.2%. This sludge was used as the inoculum. The characteristics of the inoculum and the food waste are shown in Table 1 . Food waste contained extremely high COD and TS. It was not conducive to the domestication of sludge in the reactor if food waste directly was fed into the reactor. Thus, before it was transferred to the USR, the food waste was diluted 12, 9, 6 and 3 times with water as feedstock. The corresponding chemical oxygen demand (COD) values were 8,593, 11,705, 14,837 and 31,442 mg/L, respectively.


2.2 USR configuration and operation

Fig. 1 illustrates the experimental setup. To efficiently and cost-effectively treat food waste in anaerobic digestion, the new reactor was designed. Unlike other USRs and UASB reactors, the new design did not use internal components such as phase separators to deflect gas and facilitate the return of solid particles. Gravity settlement and external recycling were used to achieve these functions. Thus, manufacturing and maintenance costs of the new USR were reduced due to the reactor’s simple internal structure. In this reactor, the development of anaerobic granules like those in a UASB reactor was not required, which avoided a long start-up and rigid operation. In addition, the floating sludge was easily removed to prevent stratification and the formation of a surface crust and the settled sludge maintained more microorganisms within the USR to increase biogas productivity.

The USR made of stainless steel had a working volume of 1,080 L with a diameter of 0.6 m and a total height of 4 m. The reaction vessel had an external jacket in which hot water circulated to maintain the temperature of the anaerobic sludge at 35 ± 2 °C. A thermometer, a pressure gauge and a pH probe were installed on the reactor to monitor the operational conditions over time. Three sampling ports were set at the height of 1 m, 2 m and 3 m of the USR, respectively. The performances of the USR were determined by measuring digestate samples which were taken from the sampling port at 1 m, and effluent water samples which were taken from the sampling port at 3 m.

As shown in Fg.1, the special design and characteristics of the USR reactor were depicted as follows. The USR was consisted of three compartments, which were a flow rising area (6), a sludge settling area (8) and a flow dropping area (9). The foodwaste influent was fed into the bottom of flow rising area (6) through the inlet pipe (1) by a diaphragm pump. A circulating pipe was set between the diaphragm pump and the reactor inlet to control the flow rate of the foodwaste influent which would be sent into reactor. A perforated piping system was installed at the bottom of the reactor to ensure a homogeneous distribution of food waste stream inside the reactor. In the USR, the liquid moved upward in the flow rising area (6) and eventually reached the liquid level at the top of the reactor. Some light sludge particles and gas were carried by the liquid to the top area. A gas-liquid separation baffle (7) was set at the junction of the flow rising area (6) and the sludge settling area (8). Some liquid droplets which were carried by the gas would be separated from the gas phase by the gas-liquid separation baffle (7) and returned to the liquid phase in flow rising area (6) along the baffle due to gravity. Gas outlet (3) was set at the top of the sludge settling area (8), and the biogas flowed out of the reactor through the outlet. The effluent outlet (4) and the floating sludge outlet (5) were set at the side of sludge settling area (8) and the side of its bottom, respectively. The deactivated or less active sludge would float to the liquid level, and would be removed through the effluent outlet (4) and the floating sludge outlet (5). On the contrary, the highly active sludge which had a good settling performance would settle to the bottom of the sludge settling area (8) and then fall back to the flow rising area (6) through the flow dropping area (9). In addition, discharge outlet (2) was set at the bottom of the reactor for periodic biogas residues removal.

The HRT of the USR was maintained relatively constant at 8 h and the upflow velocity was 0.5 m/h. Every 8 h, 200 L of food waste were fed to the reactor and an equal amount of digestate was discharged. The SRT was calculated as [24]: FORMULA: S R T = [ ( T S S r ) ( R V × D r ) ] [ ( T S S e ) ( E V × D e ) ] where SRT is solid retention time (days), TSS _r is average TSS concentration percentage in the reactor, TSS _e is percentage of TSS concentration in the reactor effluent, RV is reactor volume (L), EV is effluent volume per day, D_r is density of solid in the reactor (g/L), and D_e is density of solids in the reactor effluent (g/L) [24].

The OLR was gradually increased from 4.7 to 19.6 kg COD/(m³·d) at natural pH without any intervention. As the OLR greatly influences the treatment efficiency of a digester, it should be controlled during operation. According to the different OLRs, the operation time in this study was divided into four stages (Table 2 ). The influent temperature was maintained using a 35 °C constant temperature water bath. The operational time of the reactor was 150 days. The time included the inspection period of 15 days to ensure that the reactor was functioning properly, the commissioning period of 73 days to maintain the performance of the reactor in a steady state and the experimental period of 62 days to investigate the treatment efficiency of the USR and community changes in the USR at different OLR. The experimental data provided in this study were only collected in the experimental period.


2.3 DNA extraction, PCR amplification and pyrosequencing

Samples were collected on the 15th, 36th, 50th and 61st days of operation. Samples of 2 mL were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 5 min at 4 °C. Each sample collected was subjected to multiple DNA extraction with the TIANamp Bacteria DNA Kit to ensure that the DNA quality met the sequencing requirement. The DNA yield, purity and suitability for PCR were examined using electrophoresis. DNA samples with the best quality from each stage were chosen for high-throughput sequencing.

The hypervariable V5 and V6 regions of the Archaea 16S rRNA gene were amplified. The primer set was composed of 787F (5- ATTAGATACCCSBGTAGTCC-3) and 1059R (5-GCCATGCACCWCCTCT-3). PCR was performed under the following conditions: initial denaturation at 98 °C for 30 s, 25 cycles at 98 °C for 30 s, 50 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 30 s, and a final extension at 72 °C for 5 min. The PCR procedure was performed on all of the purified and sequenced samples by Personalbio Inc. (Shanghai, China).


2.4 Methanogenic community analysis

The sequence data obtained from pyrosequencing were filtered using the QIIME (quantitative insights into microbial ecology) software package [25]. Before analysis, the sequences were cleaned by 1) removing all sequences containing ambiguous bases (‘N’); 2) checking the completeness of the barcode and adapter; 3) removing sequences shorter than 150 bp; and 4) cutting out the primers in all the pyrotags [26]. Chimeric sequences were removed using Mothur [27]. The rest of the sequences were divided into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) at a cut-off of 97% pair-wise sequence identity with Uclust. To ensure the accuracy of the analysis results, it was necessary to simplify the OTUs by removing those with total sequences of less than 0.001% abundances. Representative sequences (at 97% similarity) were then classified using the Ribosomal Database Project (RDP) Classifier 2.0.1 [28]. The taxonomic information of each OTU was obtained using the BLAST method to compare against the sequence database (GreengeneRelease 13.8). Neighbor-joining phylogenetic trees were established from these sequences using MEGAN [29]. A Venn diagram was generated based on the OTUs distributed among the four stages. According to relative abundance at the family level, MetaPhlAn was used to profile the microbial community structure [30]. The relative abundance of each methanogen was expressed as the percentage of the total abundance of methanogens. The results were presented using a column chart. Species abundance similarity clusters according to the data and the results of clustering were expressed as a heatmap drawn using R (pheatmap). Clusters of high and low abundance of species, and similarities and differences in the community composition of several species at the genus level were reflected by the color gradient of the heatmap. Correlations between species abundance and performance were calculated using SPSS 19.0. The correlation coefficients and corresponding significance were obtained by Pearson analysis, with significance levels set at 0.05 and 0.01. Information on the abundance of 13 species at the genus level was used to calculate the correlation between species using mothur (with the calculation command otu.association). Cytoscape software was used to draw the species network analysis chart using significance <0.01 and |spearmanCoef| >0.6, and the size and color of the nodes were adjusted to clearly reflect the relationship between species and the status of species. Other figures were drawn using OriginPro 8.5.


2.5 Analytical methods

Routine analyses, including pH, TS, COD, and sludge volume index (SVI), were carried out as described in the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater [31]. Total volatile fatty acid (VFA) concentration was determined using high-performance liquid chromatography (SHIMADZU LC20AD). The chromatographic column was an Agilent HPX-87H column with a mobile phase of 0.005 mol/L H_2SO_4 and oven temperature of 60 °C. The UV detection wavelength was 210 nm and each sample reaction time was 50 min [32]. Biogas output was measured using a gas flow meter (Suzhou Chemical Instrument Co., Ltd), and the CH_4 content of the biogas samples was determined using gas chromatography (GC) (TianMei GC 7900) with a flame ionization detector [33]. The measured biogas volume was calculated by ideal gas state equation to the volume at standard temperature (0 °C) and pressure (1 atm).


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Reactor performance

Table 2 shows the operational conditions and performance of the USR at different stages of this study.

The effects of various OLRs on COD removal with time are shown in Fig. 2 (a). The USR was operated at OLRs of 4.7–5.7 kg COD/(m^3·d) at stage I. The COD removal efficiency was relatively constant at 75.9%–81.5%. The OLRs were then increased at stage II. The results showed that average 82.0% of the COD could be removed when the average OLR was 7.0 kg COD/(m^3·d) and the average COD influent concentration was 11705 mg/L. At stage III, the USR was operated at an OLR of 8.9 kg COD/(m^3·d). The COD removal efficiency decreased as the OLR increased. An OLR of 8.9 kg COD/(m^3·d) had a negative effect on the treatment effectiveness of the reactor, probably because the microbial community structure in the USR was changed by the operational conditions. When the OLR was further increased at stage IV, the reactor performance significantly deteriorated and the efficiency of COD removal rapidly dropped to 46.9% due to a large accumulation of VFAs and a decrease in pH. In addition, at stage I and II, the SVI was remained above 40 mL/g. This indicated that the sludge in the reactor had good settling property and would not be washed out of the reactor by the upflow stream. At same time, the TS content in the reactor also remained stable, proving that no sludge was lost during these two stages. On the contrary, at stage III and IV, the simultaneous decline of SVI and TS in the reactor indicated that some sludge had been flushed out of the reactor. This suggested that the sludge quality began to deteriorate and could not be remained in the lower part of the reactor as the OLR increased. Furthermore, in the effluent, many food waste granules attached to the sludge had been observed.

The above results show a higher average COD removal efficiency (82.0%) at an average OLR of 7.0 kg COD/(m^3·d) than the 75.5% COD removal efficiency of a CSTR at an OLR of around 5.5 kg COD/(m^3·d) and the 80% COD removal efficiency of an ASBR at an OLR of 5 kg COD/(m^3·d) for food waste and landfill leachate, respectively [34,35]. CSTRs are the most frequently used reactors because they are simple to operate and the biomass is well suspended in the mixed liquor, which means that microorganisms can use the substrate efficiently [36]. However, the HRT and the SRT are approximately equal in a CSTR, which can reduce AD efficiency due to the flush-out of microorganisms. The relatively high energy demand for mixing and moving their contents is another potential drawback [12]. ASBRs have the ability to separate HRT and SRT [37]. However, intermittent operation can limit their capacity to handle highly degradable organic substrates such as food waste. The new USR combines the advantages of a CSTR and an ASBR: the configuration can not only provide effective separation of HRT and SRT, but also handle highly degradable organic substrates under continuous operation. Thus, higher COD removal efficiency at a higher OLR was achieved in the pilot-scale USR operation, even though the CSTR and ASBR as used as a comparison in this study were lab-scale.

Fig. 2(b) illustrates the pH and VFA changes in the USR at different stages. In the first two stages, average VFAs were maintained at less than 300 mg/L when the OLR was increased. As VFAs were not accumulating, the microbial community of the USR had strong activity. The pH in the USR was above 7.0, suggesting that the operation of the reactor was stable. Accumulation of VFAs was observed after the OLR was increased at stage III. The VFAs in the reactor rapidly increased from 413 to 2,980 mg/L, a level that can inhibit the growth of several methanogens (e.g., Methanosaeta concilii, Methanobacterium formicicum, and Methanolacinia paynteri) [38]. The sudden increase of average VFAs to greater than 9,000 mg/L at stage IV caused the pH to decrease. This result was similar to that of Ye et al. [39].

Fig. 2(c) illustrates the changes in methane yield based on COD conversion. The methane yield fluctuated over time in the range of 217–287 L/kg COD_removal at stage I. A possible reason is that the concentration of various organic and inorganic materials influenced the performance of the digester. When the OLR increased, the methane yield increased, reaching average of 280 L/kg COD_removal. The average methane production rate was 2126.6 L/(m^3·d) at an OLR of 7.0 kg COD/(m^3·d). The corresponding average COD removal efficiency was 82.0%. The methane production rate in this study was higher than that of a CSTR [34] and similar to that of an anaerobic fixed bed reactor (AFBR) [40]. The methane production rate of the CSTR was 1350 L/(m^3·d) at an OLR of 5.5 kg COD/(m^3·d) while the methane production rate of the AFBR was 2089 L/(m^3·d) at an OLR of 6 kg COD/(m^3·d) for the treatment of the food waste. It is worth noting, however, that the aforementioned CSTR (4 L of reactor volume) and AFBR (1.3 L of reactor volume) were operated at a small scale. The comparison shows that the new USR can achieve high reactor performance.

The methane yield in this study was closer to the theoretical value of 350 L/kg COD_removal at an average COD removal efficiency of 82% compared with that reported in the literature [41]. In the last two stages, the methane yield decreased from 215 to 104 L/kg COD_removal when the OLR increased to 19.6 kg COD/(m^3·d), suggesting that the growth of methanogens was inhibited in these two stages. An OLR of less than 8 kg COD/(m³·d) is recommended to achieve a higher methane yield in a USR.


3.2 USR methanogenic community diversity

Community diversity includes richness, evenness and composition [42]. In this study, methanogenic community diversity includes the number of genera of methanogens in the reactor (richness) and community structure (composition).


3.2.1 Methanogenic genera in the USR

A total of 531,571 16S rRNA sequence reads, with an average read length of 251 bp, was generated by pyrosequencing the mixed liquor collected from the USR at different stages. As shown in Figs. S1 and 37 OTUs belonging to one Archaea phylum were observed. Twenty-five OTUs were common to all four stages. The 3 most abundant of the 25 core OTUs, accounting for 80.4% of the sequence reads, were identified as members of Methanobacterium, Methanospirillum and Methanosaeta. One OTU, accounting for 1.1% of the sequence reads, was unique to an individual sludge sample.

BLAST search results showed that all the clones belonged to class Euryarchaeota, and all were associated with methanogens (but Candidatus Nitrososphaera). All of the 16S rRNA sequences in this study were used for phylogenetic construction. Fig. 3 shows that 8 genera were identified, and some sequences were not determined at genus level. The methanogenic genera were Methanospirillum, Methanotorris, Methanomicrobiales, Methanolinea, Methanosphaerula, Methanosarcina, Methanosaeta and Methanobacterium. The tree revealed that the evolutionary relationships between the three most abundant genera (Methanobacterium, Methanospirillum and Methanosaeta) were relatively distant, and the similarity between them was about 80%.

Methanospirillum and Methanosaeta were the most abundant methanogens in the USR during all stages of operation. This result shows that the number of methanogenic genera was not affected by the influent concentration of food waste. The same methanogenic strains can survive in the same substrate environment no matter how the substrate concentration changes. A previous study showed that it is possible to maintain stable numbers of methanogenic genera because methanogens only use a limited range of simple substrates, primarily converted from complex organic material by bacterial populations [43]. By contrast, different substrates alter methanogenic community diversity [44]. Therefore, the operational process has little effect on the number of methanogenic genera. It is also unreasonable to improve reactor performance by changing the number of methanogenic genera caused by a long-term process operation.


3.2.2 Methanogenic community structures at different stages

Fig. S2 shows the methanogens with the highest abundances at all stages. The relative abundances of Methanospirillum and Methanosaeta were more than 1%. This result indicates that Methanospirillum and Methanosaeta were the most important methanogens in the USR. In addition, these two genera belong to different orders, and the general characteristics of type cultures of the two genera are also different. Changes in the status and structure of the two methanogens were closely related to the reactor’s operating condition.

Fig. 4 shows the methanogenic community structure at the different stages. As mentioned above, the methane production rate was highest at stage II, at which time the methanogenic community structure was different from that of the other stages. The reactor’s operating parameters, such as COD removal efficiency, VFA, pH and methane production rate were obviously limited within a stable range at stages I and II (as shown in Fig. 2), indicating that the methanogenic community structure at stages I and II was stable [45].

At stage I, the most abundant methanogen was Methanospirillum, representing 58% of the relative abundance in the Archaeal community. Methanosaeta was the second most common genus and represented 35.4% of the relative abundance in the Archaeal community. Methanobacterium was also found in the samples, at a level of 4.2%. As Methanospirillum is a hydrogenotrophic methanogen, these results indicate that hydrogenotrophic methanogens were more active than acetotrophic methanogens, such as Methanosaeta, at stage I. The reason for the dominance of Methanospirillum at stage I may be that hydrogenotrophic methanogens predominate in the initial stage of AD [46].

At stage II, the relative abundance of Methanosaeta increased to 58.5% due to the suitable substrate and a suitable concentration of acetate [47]. The relative abundance of Methanospirillum decreased to 28.1% while the relative abundance of Methanobacterium increased to 12.3%. It has been shown that although substrate competition might exist between two hydrogenotrophic methanogens, the increase in formate concentration also promotes the growth of Methanobacterium because Methanobacterium is capable of using both hydrogen/carbon dioxide and formate as a substrate [38]. In addition, a small amount of VFA is converted to formic acid during AD and formic acid is spread in liquids faster than hydrogen [48,49]. The increases in the relative abundance of Methanosaeta and methane production prove that Methanosaeta has great potential to improve USR performance. By contrast, Methanospirillum lost its dominant position in the methanogenic community. The main reason for this change is that acetotrophic methanogens often take advantage of flocculated sludge at the optimal stage of reactor operation [50,51].

Subsequently, the relative abundance of Methanosaeta and Methanobacterium decreased to 41% and 7%, respectively, as the OLR and VFA concentrations increased at stage III. This is consistent with reports in the literature that higher acetate concentration inhibits the growth of Methanosaeta [38]. Furthermore, the relative abundance of Methanospirillum increased to 50%, indicating that an increased concentration of VFAs was still favorable for its growth [52].

At stage IV, the OLR was increased to 18 kg COD/(m^3·d) and the corresponding VFA increased to greater than 9,000 mg/L. High VFA concentrations caused the pH to decrease to below 7.0, and resulted in serious inhibition of the microbial community in the USR; the reactor became unsuitable for growth of acetotrophic methanogens. The relative abundance of Methanosaeta and Methanobacterium further decreased to 30.5% and 3.1%, respectively, while the relative abundance of Methanospirillum further increased to 60%. The COD removal efficiency and methane yield dropped to the lowest values in the experimental period.

Although the methanogenic community structure with Methanospirillum domination at stages III and IV was similar to that at stage I, the reasons for this phenomenon maybe different. The USR performance at stages III and IV worsened so that less methane was produced than at stage I.

Different OLRs during AD did not change the number of methanogenic genera. However, methanogenic community structure and activity can respond to rapid and major changes in the environment [53] because these genera are sensitive to the external environment [54]. In a previous study, the methanogenic community structure changed in a few days when the environment in the reactor changed [55]. This result is in agreement with our finding that different relative abundances of methanogenic genera were observed at different stages. Therefore, it is feasible to adjust process operation parameters such as OLR to alter methanogenic community structure for high methane productivity.

A higher OLR has been shown to provoke an increase in the relative abundance of hydrogenotrophic methanogens in two anaerobic reactors treating dairy wastewater, an inverted fluidized bed and an expanded granular sludge bed [54]. However, this trend did was not clearly seen in our study. With an increase in OLR, the acetotrophic Methanosaeta increased and dominated the methanogenic community at stage II. After that, Methanosaeta decreased and hydrogenotrophic methanogens dominated once more, possibly because different methanogenic genera prefer different substrates and the process may be selective for different microbial groups [56]. When acetate was sufficiently supplied to the methanogenic community at stage II, shown in Fig. 2(b), Methanosaeta could grow faster than other methanogens. When acetate was excessively supplied to the methanogenic community at stages III and IV, Methanosaeta was inhibited. Although the relative abundance of hydrogenotrophic methanogens increased, methane productivity decreased.

The relative distribution of 14 types of methanogens is shown in Fig. S3. There were significant increases in the relative abundances of Methanoscarcina, Methanolobus, Methanobrevibacter, Methanothermobacter, Candidatus, Methanosaeta and Methanobacterium at stage II. These results suggest that the conditions at stage II were more favorable for the growth of these seven genera of methanogens, which make a major contribution to biomethane production. However, Methanoscarcina, Methanolobus, Methanobrevibacter, Methanothermobacter and Candidatus Nitrososphaera made only a small contribution to the community structure, accounting for only 1.0% of the methanogenic community. The relative abundance of Methanospirillum, Methanocorpusculum, Methanoculleus and Methanofollis increased at stage IV, indicating that these methanogens can survive under high organic loading conditions. The relative abundance of Methanolinea was highest at stage I, indicating that Methanolinea can only survive under low organic loading conditions.

In short, the methanogenic community structures at the four stages were different. The best reactor performance was achieved at stage II when Methanosaeta was the dominant methanogen in the reactor. As shown in Table S1, a previous study reported a similar community structure in different reactor types [57]. The relative abundance of Methanosaeta in the new reactor configuration was higher than that of the reactors with high COD input, which explains why the new pilot USR achieved improved performance.


3.3 Correlation analysis

Correlation analysis was conducted to further explain why the Methanosaeta-dominated community promoted the best performance of the new reactor. Table 3 shows the correlations between the physical-chemical parameters and methanogenic genera in the USR. All of the physical-chemical parameters were significantly correlated with each other at the 0.01 level. These correlations indicate that OLR had an important impact on digestion ability and efficiency. A positive correlation was detected between OLR and VFA concentration while a negative correlation was detected between OLR, COD removal efficiency and VFA concentration. Although there was no significant correlation between OLR and the relative abundance of a methanogen in the USR, the VFA concentration was significantly correlated with the relative abundance of a methanogen at the 0.05 level. These results indicate that OLR did not have a direct impact on methanogens and that VFA concentration influenced the structure of the methanogen community The results are consistent with those of McMahon et al. [58]. The methane yield, COD removal efficiency and relative abundance of the methanogens were significantly correlated and there was a negative correlation between the relative abundance of Methanospirillum, COD removal efficiency and methane yield, suggesting that Methanospirillum has a low ability to use the substrate. By contrast, there was a positive correlation between the relative abundance of Methanosaeta, COD removal efficiency and methane yield, suggesting that Methanosaeta plays an important role in enhancing USR performance.

Fig. 5 shows the relationship between different methanogenic genera in the USR. Among these methanogens, Methanosaeta, Methanobacterium and Methanospirillum were the most abundant. Positive correlations were obtained among Methanosaeta, Methanobacterium and three other methanogens (Methanosarcina, Methanobrevibacter and Methanothermobacter). No negative correlations were found among Methanosaeta and Methanobacterium and other methanogens. These results indicate that the increase in the relative abundance of Methanosaeta and Methanobacterium did not inhibit the proliferation and metabolism of other methanogens. On the contrary, these two methanogens stimulated the growth of small methanogenic genera such as Methanobrevibacter. Thus, when the relative abundance of Methanosaeta increased, the total methanogenic abundance in the reactor and the methane production capacity of the reactor also increased. However, there were negative correlations between Methanospirillum and Methanofollis and Methanoculleus, and no positive correlation was observed between Methanospirillum and any of the other methanogens. The differences in the correlations with other methanogens may explain the different efficiencies of the reactor when Methanosaeta and Methanospirillum were the dominant methanogens. Meanwhile, there was no correlation between Methanospirillum and Methanosaeta, suggesting that the changes in their relative abundance were independent. Therefore, the correlation analysis can also be used to explain the changes in the reactor’s efficiency in terms of which methanogen was dominant, Methanosaeta or Methanospirillum.


4 Conclusions

The new pilot USR maintained an average COD removal efficiency of over 82% and VFA concentrations of less than 310 mg/L when OLRs were between 7.0 and 7.6 kg COD/(m^3·d). Under these conditions, a Methanosaeta-dominated methanogenic community was successfully established and the average methane yield reached 280 L/kg COD_removal. Homoacetogenesis plus aceticlastic methanogens are speculated to be the main pathways for methane production. A positive significant correlation was shown between the relative abundance of Methanosaeta and COD removal efficiency and methane yield.


 CRediT authorship contribution statement

Demao Li: Investigation, Resources, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Visualization, Funding acquisition, Project administration. Ruohao Tang: Investigation, Data curation, Writing - review & editing, Visualization, Project administration. Liang Yu: Resources, Writing - review & editing, Visualization. Limei Chen: Investigation, Writing - review & editing. Shulin Chen: Resources, Supervision, Funding acquisition. Song Xu: Data curation, Writing - review & editing. Feng Gao: Investigation.


Appendix A Supplementary data

The following is the Supplementary data to this article:


Appendix A Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2020.02.020.