TITLE: High-rate upflow anaerobic sludge blanket bioreactor for the treatment of olive mill effluents: Laboratory and pilot scale systems investigation


1 Introduction

The olive tree has been cultivated in the Mediterranean countries since prehistoric times, with great cultural, economic, and nutritional importance for the people of these regions. Mediterranean countries are responsible for most of the world's olive oil production [1]. Olive oil is an integral part of the Mediterranean diet, rich in antioxidants and more specifically phenolic compounds. Thus, a high concentration of phenols in olive oil is a desirable characteristic, as it usually increases its commercial and health value [2].

The types of olive mill wastes depend on the applied olive oil extraction process. These wastes can vary in moisture, from liquid (moisture content higher than 90%) to semi-solid pastes (about 60% moisture). Each type of waste creates different challenges that must be overcome to manage it. During olive oil production through the three-phase process, olive mill waste is produced in the horizontal centrifugation stage. When the two-phase extraction process is applied, without the addition of water, a two-phase olive pomace is produced [3].

Olive mill wastewater from three-phase olive mills (OMW) is characterized by low biodegradability, mainly due to the high concentration of polyphenols that significantly inhibit any biological degradation process [4,5]. Its low biodegradability, together with its high concentration of organic compounds (20–400 times higher than municipal wastewater), causes serious problems in the management of this type of waste [6,7].

A common practice for OMW management is through evaporation in controlled open ponds (evaporation lagoons), thus requiring huge areas of land, with the possibility of water recipients’ pollution if the waste passes through soil percolation [8,9], the development of unpleasant odors, the proliferation of insects and the increase of methane emissions to the atmosphere [5,8]. OMW can also be used, in small doses, as a soil fertilizer [10]. A common practice adopted by most olive oil-producing countries a few decades ago was to discharge OMW directly into rivers, causing eutrophication due to excessive algal blooms [11].

The linear economic model (resource extraction-production-consumption-waste generation) is not sustainable in a world where natural resources are being depleted and the capacity to generate and absorb waste is limited [12]. The problems mentioned above require its replacement by the circular economy model. This issue was first discussed in the 1960s, but only in the last decade has it attracted the interest of the authorities, as it is part of the discussion around "sustainable development".

Anaerobic digestion has been extensively studied for the treatment of various waste streams, from industrial wastes to agricultural and livestock residues [13]. Some of the major advantages of anaerobic digestion are related to energy and soil fertilizer production [14]. Nowadays, biogas plants are an established process for the treatment of agricultural and livestock waste. As reported in the work of Ingrao et al. [15], about 70% of anaerobic digestion plants operating in the European Union use agricultural waste as feedstock. Except for the main product (biomethane) several sub-products could be produced from this treatment method in order to increase process sustainability. For instance, biohydrogen can be produced via dark fermentation in certain conditions of operating temperature and pH [16]. Moreover, volatile fatty acids (VFAs) could be produced using techniques to deactivate the VFAs consumers in a methanogenic bioreactor [17]. Finally, the anaerobic effluent could be used as a fertilizer after composting with other co-substrates and maturation in order to return nutrients back to the soil and displace some chemical-based fertilizers [18]. Several challenges might occur though, during the anaerobic digestion of OMW. Most of them are related to the waste's acidic pH, low nitrogen and high lipid concentrations [19]. These issues can be solved using several physicochemical pretreatments, such as membrane filtration [20], or co-digesting other wastes alongside OMW in order to supplement the reactor's feed stream with nutrients [21].

The Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) reactor system was developed by Professor Gatze Lettinga between 1976 and 1980 at the Wageningen University, Netherlands. The reactor set-up often includes parts (lid or metallic plate) in the upper part of the reactor in order to retain the sludge granules inside the reactor's body but not block up the hydrodynamic flux [22]. This set-up might improve methanization up to 80% considering that increased biomass is available for product formation [23]. This type of reactor has many advantages. For this reason, it finds wide applications in the waste treatment industry. Its arrangement is simple with low energy requirements. Moreover, the amount of sludge produced is small, specifically, 3–5 times less, than that produced in an aerobic system [24]. On the other hand, the reactor's start-up is relatively difficult and time-consuming [25], since a long time is often required for the microorganisms to adapt to the reactor's conditions. The major difference between a UASB reactor compared to a fluidized-bed (AFB) reactor and an anaerobic filter (AF) is that, in AFB and AF, sludge granules are attached to a carrier medium, increasing process fixed capital investment and operational cost [26]. Comparing a UASB reactor with a periodic anaerobic baffled reactor (PABR), the microorganisms are not required to be in granule form in order to be kept inside the latter reactor [27].

The aim of this study was the experimental optimization of anaerobic digestion of OMW in laboratory and pilot-scale reactors. Waste streams of different regions of Greece were examined for representative process evaluation. Certain organic loading scenarios were implemented in the laboratory system to evaluate the maximum methane productivity. The most promising scenarios were implemented in the pilot-scale UASB system. Many authors have studied the anaerobic digestion of olive mill effluents. In the work of Sampaio et al. [19], it was exhibited that OMW treatment with an organic load of 55 g_COD/L could be directly exploitable through the process without any prior treatment. Moreover, the study of Angelidaki et al. [28] established that the co-digestion of OMW with nutrient-rich waste streams in a UASB reactor can benefit the productivity of the process. Furthermore, the authors observed that the high organic loading rate (OLR) of the reactor (∼70 g_COD/L_R/d) did not unstabilize the digestion process. Also, some authors have investigated the anaerobic digestion of OMW using specific resins for polyphenols absorption, as pretreatment [29]. The authors reported that the implementation of this treatment method could improve the methane production up to 30% removing a significant amount of polyphenols. However, most of the OMW treatment processes proposed in the literature include the pretreatment of the waste in order to remove most of the suspended solids. This fact may increase the process cost and environmental footprint as well as the process complexity. Moreover, the efficient treatment of effluents occurring from the secondary extraction of residual pomace oil with a UASB bioreactor constitutes a useful approach for the Mediterranean region. Summarizing, this study aims to present a viable solution for OMW management combined with energy production by investigating easily applicable laboratory systems and more advanced pilot scale setups, promoting a more sustainable olive oil production industry.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Feed material and inoculum

Four different OMW samples from the region of Western Greece were used as feedstock for the anaerobic digestion systems (Fig. 1 ). The first OMW sample was collected from the region of Kerkyra, Greece (Sample 1), the second from the region of Agrinio, Greece (Sample 3), the third from the region of Kalamata, Greece (Sample 4), and the fourth from the region of Patras, Achaia, Greece (Sample 5). Moreover, liquid waste from the horizontal decanter of a pomace oil production facility using two-phase pomace as feedstock in the region of Pyrgos, Greece (Sample 2) was also examined. All the samples were collected during the peak of olive oil production period (November/December 2019). A wide variation in the characteristics of OMW has been observed in the literature, depending on the type of the olive tree, the way of its cultivation, the season of the olive harvest, and the practices followed during the harvest and production of the olive oil at the olive mill. The characterization of OMW is of utmost importance, since the suitability of the substrate for the proposed process can be determined. The main characteristics of the waste samples that were used as substrates are presented in Table 1 .

Slightly acidic pH values accompanied by relatively low alkalinity (as feedstock for anaerobic digestion processes) were observed in Sample 3. Regarding the pH value for Sample 1, it was already below the value of 4.5, and its alkalinity could not be measured. The solids content of these wastes appeared to differ significantly, since Sample 3 contained 65% more total solids (TS) than Sample 1. In both samples, the solids contained were organic biomass at a percentage of approximately 85%. The samples’ humidity exceeded 90%, with Sample 3 containing less water, a difference that might be due to the amount of water added during the olive oil production process [30].

Sample 4 presented the highest pH and alkalinity values. Its TS and volatile solids (VS) values were similar to those of Sample 3, but fewer of them were suspended (TSS, VSS). Also, this waste had very high COD values, which seem to be mainly derived from carbohydrates, but accompanied by high values in the fats and oils content. Additionally, it showed the highest phenolic content, at 11.37 g/L.


2.2 Analytical methods

Regarding the lab scale experiments, the sample's pH and alkalinity were determined by a pH meter with an electrode (Thermo Scientific, Orion ROSS Ultra Refillable Ph/ATC Triode). TS and VS content was calculated by weighing a fresh sample amount before and after drying at 105 °C and a dried sample amount before and after burning at 550 °C, respectively, according to Standard Methods (Method 2540) [31]. Total suspended (TSS) and volatile suspended solids (VSS) were determined using a GF/F type filter with a 0.7 μm pore size (Method 2540). Total and dissolved Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) were estimated photometrically at 600 nm, according to Standard Methods (Method 5220) [31] using the raw sample and the sample after filtration with glass fiber filter (Whatman glass microfiber filters, Grade GF/F), respectively. Total and dissolved carbohydrates were measured photometrically after the reaction with l-tryptophane in the presence of H_3BO_3 and H_2SO_4 [32] using the raw sample and the sample after filtration with glass fiber filter (Whatman glass microfiber filters, Grade GF/F), respectively. The total phenolic content (TPC) was determined using the Folin-Ciocalteu reagent and expressed in syringic acid equivalents [33,34]. Total and ammonium nitrogen was measured with a Kjeldahl apparatus (Method 4500 NH_3) [31] while Fats & Oils were determined after extraction using a Soxhlet apparatus (Velp Scientifica, SER 148). The total phosphorus was measured after the conversion of all forms of phosphorus in the sample to orthophosphate ions [31].

Biogas composition (methane and carbon dioxide) and Volatile Fatty Acids (VFAs) were analyzed by gas chromatography (Agilent Technologies 7890A) equipped with a capillary HP-PLOT/Q column (30 m in length, 0.53 mm I.D. and 40 μm packing film) and a thermal conductivity detector for biogas composition measurement, and a capillary DB-FFAP column (30m length, 0.32 mm I.D., and 0.25 μm packaging film) and a flame ionizing detector for VFAs measurement, according to Tsigkou et al. [35]. Regarding the biogas composition measurement, the column initial temperature was set at 80 °C and was gradually ramped up at a rate of 50 ^°C/min until it reached the temperature of 200 °C. This temperature was retained for 2 min. The thermal conductivity detector temperature was set at 250 °C. Regarding the VFAs measurement, the column initial temperature was set at 110 °C and was gradually ramped up at a rate of 15 °C/min until it reached 250 °C. This temperature was retained for 5 min. The detector temperature was fixed at 300 °C. Standard curves of VFAs solutions for various dilutions were used to calculate the sample's concentration in these compounds, relating the detector's peaks with the standard samples' concentrations. The carrier gas was nitrogen in the case of the biogas composition analysis and helium for the VFAs determination. The experimental data were examined for statistical differences through ANOVA analysis and Tuckey test. Significance was established at p < 0.05. The analysis was performed using Minitab 18 software.


2.3 Lab scale experimental set-up

A schematic representation of the lab-scale experimental set-up is presented in Fig. 2 . A conventional UASB reactor constructed from plexiglass was used. The reactor has a total volume of 7 L and a working volume of 6.2 L, with double wall for the recirculation of heated water in order to keep the temperature constant, at 37 °C, throughout the experiment. The water was heated using a water bath with temperature controller and the recirculation was carried out using a peristaltic pump. Next to the reactor, a refrigerator was installed to store the reactor feedstock under stirring. Cooling and constant stirring of the feed mixture were necessary to preserve its physicochemical characteristics and homogeneity. The reactor was fed every 6 h through an automated system, using a piping system and a peristaltic pump. The reactor's feed consisted of OMW in a specific dilution (according to the applied OLR condition) and NaHCO_3 (3 g/L_feed) in order to maintain the reactor's pH and alkalinity in ideal levels for anaerobic digestion. The agitation of the reactor contents was carried out using recirculation with an upflow velocity of 1 m/h. The effluent was collected by overflow, displaced by the feed inflow. The effluent was collected in a glass conical flask with a capacity of 2 L, which was hermetically sealed with a rubber stopper. The produced gas, after being quantified by the recording system, was released into the atmosphere. The biogas recording system consisted of a glass “U” pipe filled with mineral oil and a photoelectric cell. When the level of oil reached the photoelectric cell's beam, the volume of biogas was measured, and the biogas was released into the atmosphere.


2.4 Pilot scale experimental setup

The pilot scale reactor was constructed of INOX 306 stainless steel with a working volume of 33 L and included a double wall, where hot water (37 ± 1 °C) was circulated. The UASB reactor was designed and constructed based on the reactor used in the laboratory-scale experiments. The system setup is presented in Fig. 3 . The feed tank was equipped with a stirring system. The feedstock feed was carried out periodically, namely three times per day (every 8 h) using a screw pump, in the bottom of the reactor. Recirculation was performed with a peristaltic pump with an upward velocity of 1 m/h. The effluent was collected in a 20 L container through overflow. A U-shaped system was formed with the outlet pipe, in which a small part of the effluent was retained to isolate the inner reactor body and maintain anaerobic conditions.

The continuous measurement of biogas production was carried out with a rotating drum-type gas meter (RITTER-Drum-type Gas Meters TG-Series) accompanied by temperature recording to report the results in STP conditions. The meter contained a rotating measuring mechanism, namely a drum, which was inside a low-viscosity liquid (pure water). As the gas enters the meter, the drum periodically fills and empties four rigid chambers through rotation. The gas volume measurement and its flow rate were obtained using the RIGAMO software via a computer.

An MRU-SWG 100 Biogas analyzer was used to measure the biogas composition. The pH measurement and temperature control were continuous and were carried out with a HACH pH meter with a permanently immersed electrode inside the reactor.


2.5 Start-up of anaerobic digestion systems

At the start of the lab-scale experiment, the UASB reactor was inoculated up to 1/3 of its working volume with anaerobic sludge (TS = 51 ± 3.2 g/L, VS = 45 ± 1.6 g/L, pH 8.35). The remaining 2/3 was filled with tap water. The upward flow velocity was set at 1 m/h and remained constant throughout the experiment. The feed was started the third day after start-up considering that the reactor temperature and upstream velocity had stabilized in this timespan. Regarding the pilot system's start-up, the reactor was filled with active anaerobic sludge from an anaerobic digestion treatment plant in Agrinio, Greece. It was then allowed to acclimatize for 5 days for biologically activated microorganisms' adaptation to temperature conditions prior to normal operation.


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Lab-scale experiments - OLR optimization

In this section, ten separate scenarios with 4 different OLRs were studied, and four different wastes were utilized (S1, S2, S3, and S4). The results are presented in Fig. 4 . Scenarios S1 (S1.1, S1.2, and S1.3) were conducted using Sample 1 as substrate with OLRs 1, 2, and 5 g_COD/L_R/d respectively. During scenario S1.3, half of the reactor's biomass was removed in an effort to duplicate the reactor (the removal of biomass is indicated in the results by a dashed vertical line). It should be noted that, in these two individual scenarios (S1.3 scenario before and after dashed line), the system took approximately the same amount of time to reach steady-state conditions (63 days and 81 days respectively). S2 was carried out using Sample 2 as substrate with OLRs 3.5 (S2.1), 4.5 (S2.2), 5 (S2.3), and 6 g_COD/L_R/d (S2.4). S3.1 and S4.1 and S4.2 were performed with Sample 3 and Sample 4 as substrates with OLRs 6 and 5, 6 g_COD/L_R/d respectively.

The ideal pH and alkalinity values for anaerobic digestion are 6.8–7.2 and 3 g/L respectively, while the process can be functional without inhibition at pH values of 6.5–8 [36,37]. The reactor's pH was generally within the permissible values as can be seen in Fig. 4a. More specifically, the pH in the reactor varied between the values of 6.76–8.07. Its upper limit was slightly higher than the maximum acceptable value found in the literature. However, this value corresponded to the first day of system operation and was not indicative since all other measurements were within the limits mentioned above. Concerning the S2 scenarios, it was observed that the alkalinity of the reactor exhibited a significant reduction to 2 g CaCO_3/L. This drop was justified since in scenario S2.1 the addition of NaHCO_3 to the reactor had stopped.

Moving from S1.1 to S1.2 scenario, an increase in the feed's TSS and VSS was observed, but the system managed to eventually consume them. The degradation of TSS increased from 61.44% (S1.1) to 64% (S1.2). For VSS, the degradation remained at the same levels. Concerning the S1.3 scenario, there were sharp variations in the experimental measurements of effluent solids, demonstrating that the feed solids concentration was high enough to negatively affect the system's performance. The degradation of TSS and VSS in this scenario increased to 30.44% and 44.76%. In the S2 scenarios, it was observed that the increase in OLR values led to an increase of solids degradation (50% for S2.2 and 63% for S2.3). Nevertheless, the reactor performance was satisfactory concerning the hydrolysis step. In S3 and S4 scenarios, the system seemed to manage better the degradation of solids, reaching 57.88% degradation of TSS and 63.82% degradation of VSS at steady state.

The degradation of total and soluble COD is an important parameter for the operation of the system (Fig. 4c). In all tested scenarios, the degradations of t-COD exceeded 70%. Concerning the S1.1 scenario, it was calculated that the conversion of t-COD was 85.16% while that of d-COD was 85.50%. In the S1.2 scenario, a drop in the conversion to 74.89% for t-COD was observed, and an even greater drop for d-COD reaching 59.61%. The reduced COD degradation in the scenarios with OLR 6 g_COD/L_R/d indicated that the system had reached its limits at this value of OLR. In the work of Sabbah et al. [38], it was observed that similar continuous systems could potentially operate at greater OLR values after the pretreatment of OMW. Specifically, COD removal efficiency of 80% for OLR 8 g_COD/L_R/d and hydraulic retention time (HRT) equal to 5 d were observed. The differences in OLR compared to the OLRs of this study (5 and 6 g_COD/L_R/d) might have occurred due to the pretreatment of the waste with sand filtration and adsorption on activated carbon in the work of Sabbah et al. This kind of pretreatment could remove the hardly degradable organic matter such as lipids and phenolic compounds and increase the COD reduction efficiency with simultaneous increase of process operational cost.

One of the components of the organic load was the carbohydrate content of the waste. The degradation of carbohydrates was very high throughout the experiment, reaching a percentage of 79% in terms of total carbohydrates, and almost 100% in terms of soluble carbohydrates. It is worth mentioning that the carbohydrates concentration of the reactor's feed increased significantly in scenarios S3 and S4. This fact may have been caused by the higher concentration of carbohydrates in the substrate. Nevertheless, the system managed to handle the large concentrations of carbohydrates since their degradation reached high rates.

Among the effluent VFAs, acetic and propionic acid were predominant, as shown in Fig. 4e. The remaining VFAs (iso-butyrate, butyrate, isovaleric, valeric, and caproic acid) appeared in much lower concentrations. Relative increases in VFAs concentrations were found at the beginning of the scenarios but decreased as the reactor approached steady-state conditions. Acetic acid showed a maximum concentration of 2600 mg/L on day 310 of the reactor's operation. The measurement of VFAs was an important criterion for the operation of the anaerobic digestion system. Propionic and butyric acid can inhibit methanogenesis. The methanogenesis inhibition is not a direct result of VFAs concentration but is related to the protons (H^+) that VFAs provide to the system according to the pH inhibition equations that are provided by Batstone et al. [39]. The concentration of propionic acid should be less than 3000 mg/L [36]. In this experiment, the values of this VFA were within the permissible limits, however, their high concentration in the latter scenarios indicated that a further increase in OLR would potentially lead to values greater than 3000 mg/L and therefore to the inhibition of anaerobic digestion.

The presence of high concentrations of phenolic compounds is an inhibitory factor for anaerobic microorganisms. More specifically, studies have shown that these compounds probably inhibit the biodegradability of complex molecules at the initial stage of hydrolysis [40] as well as the acetate methanogenesis stage [41]. In the first scenarios (day 0 to day 250) no degradation of the phenolic content was observed. In some cases, the concentration of phenols in the effluent of the system was greater than the feed's concentration. This fact was probably due to the presence of certain flavonoids, such as quercetin, in the OMW effluent, the concentration of which increases during anaerobic digestion [42]. However, this fact is a hypothesis that needs to be proved in future studies. Concerning scenarios S2, it was observed that there was a significant reduction in the phenolic compounds of the reactor's effluent. This may have been caused either from the acclimation of the preexisting microorganisms inhabiting the reactor to OMW phenols, or that new microorganisms originating from the feedstock, capable of phenol degradation, were introduced. De Fonseca et al. [43], exhibited that there are several bacterial species that could degrade aromatic compounds such as the polyphenols of the two-phase olive pomace. It is possible that certain amounts of these species might have been introduced to the system with S2 that originated from two-phase olive pomace extraction. Interestingly, the feedstock of S2 was the effluent of a pomace oil extraction process, where typically two-phase pomace is stored for a prolonged period (can even reach the scale of months) prior to pomace oil extraction. This fact could have allowed the acclimation of microorganisms to phenol degradation in the original substrate. The maximum percentage of phenols degradation reached 59%.

Regarding the scenario S1.1, the steady-state methane production rate of the system was 0.26 L/L_R/d. In scenario S1.2, the increased OLR led to a higher methane production rate (0.42 L/L_R/d). The maximum methane production rate occurring on the 57th day of system operation was 0.60 L/L_R/d. Moving to S1.3, the steady state average value was 0.92 L/L_R/d. The maximum value of the methane production rate was 1.56 L/L_R/d and occurred on the 475th day of system operation. Finally, instability in system productivity regarding the scenarios with OLR 6 g_COD/L_R/d was observed. These results agree with the results of Zakoura et al. [44] where the VFAs concentration of the bioreactor was increased with the OLR increasing above the value of 6.2 g_COD/L_R/d. In the same work, the maximum value of methane productivity reached 1.06 L_CH4/L_R/d, slightly lower than the productivity of the present study (32%). The comparison of the optimum results of the present study with literature articles are presented in Table 2 . It is worth noting that the methane productivity of the UASB reactor was higher than the CSTR reactors. This fact was established clearly by the increased OLRs value, that the UASB systems could efficiently operate. This increase is related to the rheological characteristics and the shape of this type of reactor since increased sludge concentrations was observed, compared to the values of a CSTR system [44].

The results of the laboratory reactor's performance are summarized in Table 3 . The maximum COD removal percentage was observed for S2.1 as substrate and OLR equal to 3.5 g_COD/L_R/d. Nevertheless, the COD removal was up to 60% for all laboratory experimental scenarios. The higher productivity yield was calculated for the last scenario (S4.2). This fact may occur due to the acclimatization of the anaerobic consortium in OMW and the different phenols concentration for each type of waste leading to different inhibition effects in organic matter disintegration [19]. In the work of Gonçalves et al. [49], it was observed that the anaerobic treatment of OMW with the acclimatized consortium in long chain fatty acids led to an increased methane yield by 10%.


3.2 Pilot-scale experiments - OLR optimization

The most promising scenarios of lab scale experiments were examined in the pilot scale experiments (OLR = 5 g_COD/L_R/d and OLR = 6 g_COD/L_R/d). All pilot-scale scenarios were conducted using the S5 sample (Table 1) and were monitored until steady-state was reached. At the beginning of the pilot reactor operation in the OLR 2 g_COD/L_R/d scenario (acclimatization scenario), it was observed that the effluent COD had higher values than the feed COD (Fig. 5 ). This fact was potentially observed due to some amount of remaining degradable organic matter in anaerobic sludge that was washed from the reactor. Moving on to the next scenarios, a satisfactory degradation of total and soluble COD (69.5% and 51.3% for OLR 5 and 70.5% and 84% for OLR 6, respectively) was observed. These removal results are in line with the results of other pilot UASB systems where the removal reached 60% [50]. Nevertheless, by increasing the feed's COD even further (∼90 g_COD/L), it appears that COD degradation decreased to 59%.

The results of carbohydrates' biodegradability were in the same direction as organic matter degradation. The maximum removal yields were observed during the OLR 6 g_COD/L_R/d scenario with 67% for the total carbohydrates and 93% for the dissolved carbohydrates. Regarding VFAs, a small instability was observed during the reactor's acclimatization period. Concerning the OLR 5 g_COD/L_R/d scenario, this variance diminished and very low VFAs concentrations were observed in the reactor's effluent (300 mg/L). Comparing these results to the laboratory reactor, it was also observed that the dominant effluent VFAs were the acetic and propionic acid in concentrations of 150–300 mg/L and 200 mg/L respectively, while the other VFAs were found in much lower concentrations. However, by increasing the organic load of the feed beyond 6 g_COD/L_R/d, an acid production instability was observed, since VFAs appeared in the effluent at high concentrations (up to 4000 mg/L), indicating that the reactor reached its operating limits.

The maximum methane productivity was observed on day 41 at 1.15 L_CH4/L_R/d, a lower value than the laboratory maximum value (1.89 L_CH4/L_R/d), while its methane content was around 65%, higher than the laboratory scale experiment (50%). The methane content of biogas also depends on the characteristics of the waste. The pilot reactor effluent showed a higher fats & oils content than the laboratory reactor, so the difference in methane percentages could be attributed to the different organic matter of the feed. In Fig. 5e, it was observed that the pilot scale productivity was lower than the laboratory scale reactor for all experimental scenarios. These differences can be attributed to the fact that the feed tank was not kept refrigerated in the pilot scale experiments (as was the case in the laboratory experiments), but at ambient temperature, probably allowing partial degradation of the organic matter before entering the reactor. Finally, a significant drop in biogas productivity at loading rates above OLR 6 g_COD/L_R/d (optimum OLR for the laboratory-scale experiments) becomes clear. This fact is probably due to the inhibition of the methanogenesis stage by the increased concentrations of VFAs observed at the end of the pilot reactor operation.

Concerning the phenolic compounds of the process, no degradation was observed in the pilot scale experiment. This fact may have occurred due to the low acclimatization of the inoculum in this specific type of waste. In order to improve the bioreactor's phenol degradation, certain methods could be applied, mainly concerning the inoculum type, feeding process and reactor type. According to Gonçalves et al. [51], the switching from continuous to fed-batch reactor could improve the methane yield as well as the phenol degradation performance reaching to a maximum of 81%. Moreover, Enaime et al. [52] reported that the usage of granular activated carbon filling inside the reactor may contribute to greater performance in phenol degradation considering that the initial reactor's consortium originated from a typical wastewater facility and phenol degradation was exhibited even in the initial period of operation.


4 Conclusions

Laboratory and pilot scale systems were evaluated to optimize the OLR of olive mill effluents' anaerobic digestion. For this reason, four different samples of OMW and one sample of pomace oil extraction wastewater were evaluated for their biodegradability. Different scenarios were implemented in the system to acclimatize the biomass to certain conditions. It is worth noting that the reactor's feed consisted of untreated OMW and water for dilution without any prior treatment for solids removal. The OLR was increased successively and reached 6 g COD/L_R/d giving satisfactory degradation and biogas production. Among the waste samples tested, there was considerable variation in their physicochemical characteristics, but the system was capable of processing all the samples at comparable loadings. The proposed laboratory system proved capable, not only of the conversion of a significant amount of the organic content into biogas, but also of degrading the phenolic compounds in percentages that reached 59%. On the other hand, the pilot scale system did not show any phenolic compound removal potentially due to the short period of acclimatization of the initial inoculum.


 Funding

This work has been co-financed by the European Union and Greek national funds through the Regional Operational Program “Western Greece 2014–2020”, under the Call “Regional Research and Innovation Strategies for Smart Specialization (RIS3) in Agro-food” (project: DER6-0021057 entitled “Integrated Energy and Environmental Exploitation of Olive Oil Production by-products, OLIVENERGY”).


 CRediT authorship contribution statement

Georgios Manthos: Data curation, Software, Investigation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Validation, Writing – original draft. Dimitris Zagklis: Methodology, Formal analysis, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. Vasiliki Papavasileiou: Investigation, Data curation, Validation. Nektaria Anastasia Gkountou: Investigation, Data curation, Validation. Zinovia Saita: Investigation, Data curation, Validation. Constantina Zafiri: Resources, Project administration. Michael Kornaros: Resources, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition.