TITLE: Long-term performance, membrane fouling behaviors and microbial community in a hollow fiber anaerobic membrane bioreactor (HF-AnMBR) treating synthetic terephthalic acid-containing wastewater


1 Introduction

Purified terephthalic acid (PTA) is a widely used raw materials for the production of various petrochemical products such as polyethylene terephthalate, polyester textile fibers and polyester films (Joung et al., 2009; Kim et al., 2012). During the PTA manufacturing procedure, around 3–10 m^3 high-strength wastewater is generated per ton PTA manufactured (Ma et al., 2017). The complex structure, poor biodegradability and high toxicity of terephthalic acid, acetic acid, benzoic acid, p-toluic acid (Kleerebezem et al., 1999) and other minor pollutants (i.e., trimellitic acid, o-phthalic acid and 4-carboxybenzaldehyde) (Lee et al., 2005) present in PTA wastewater pose great challenges for ecological environment and even human health. Thus, it is of great urgency to develop a technology for PTA wastewater treatment.

There are many technologies developed for PTA wastewater treatment, including physicochemical and biological methods (Crepaldi et al., 2002; Garg and Prasad, 2015; Thiruvenkatachari et al., 2007). However, it is tricky to use physical and chemical method alone in a wide range because of the high investment cost and secondary pollution. Thus, the studies concerned with the biodegradation of toxic refinery wastewaters have been increasing significantly. Initially, PTA wastewater was mainly treated by aerobic technologies, including A/O (Guo et al., 2009), sequencing batch reactor, biofiltration (Xie et al., 2009), activated sludge process (Liang et al., 2019), etc. At present, the urgent need for renewable bio-energy have motivated researchers to search for environmentally-friendly approaches. Anaerobic biodegradation has attracted ever-increasing attention due to sustainable advantages, such as superiority of higher effluent water quality, lower nutrient requirements, less surplus sludge and greater energy recovery like methane (Zhang et al., 2021) and hydrogen (Fu et al., 2021). Traditional anaerobic biological treatment methods for PTA wastewater include continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR), expanded granular sludge bed (EGSB) and up-flow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) (Guo et al., 2015; Siddique et al., 2017; Vermorel et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2010). Amongst, UASB has been widely used for treating a variety of wastewaters. However, the process stability and long-term performance of UASB strongly rely on the structural integrity and microbial activity of granular sludge. The dispersion and wash-out of granular sludge always takes place when highly toxic wastewaters are treated as the feedstock, which affects process stability and methane-conversion efficiency.

Over the past decades, membrane bioreactor (MBR) technology, due to the superior effluent quality and stable performance, has developed intensively to overcome the disadvantages aforementioned in UASB (Cote et al., 2012). Numerous works have proved the high efficiency and practical feasibility of MBR in treating refractory wastewaters (Ong et al., 2014; Razavi and Miri, 2015; Rezaei et al., 2020). In contrast to traditional biological process, the complete separation of hydraulic retention time (HRT) and solid retention time (SRT) can be achieved in MBR so that a high microbial activity can be maintained (Kong et al., 2019). A few studies have applied anaerobic MBR (AnMBR) for treating pharmaceutical (Kaya et al., 2019; Svojitka et al., 2017), and refinery-petrochemical wastewaters (Van Zyl et al., 2008). To date, however, the investigations regarding the treatment of terephthalic acid-containing wastewater with AnMBR are still very rare in the literature. In view of the complex components and high toxicity, the successful start-up and long-term process stability of terephthalic acid wastewater treatment is still a challenging task.

Anaerobic digestion treatment is a complex biochemical process, and is usually affected by various environmental parameters such as types of wastewaters, chemical constitutes, operational conditions, microbial activity, organic loading rate (OLR) and HRT (Maaz et al., 2019). Among these factors, HRT is a crucial parameter governing anaerobic treatment process for its significant effects on OLR, microbial diversity/activity and methane-conversion rate. Theoretically, longer HRT is beneficial to the removal of pollutants whereas this causes larger reactor volume and higher capital cost. Contrarily, membrane fouling, organic acid accumulation and reduced biogas production can be caused by shorter HRT (Botheju and Bakke, 2011; Dereli et al., 2014). Many works relative to PTA treatments have been carried out to study the performance efficiency with different OLRs (0.67–4.0 g COD/L/d) and HRTs (8.0 h - 12.0 d) (Elreedy et al., 2016; Shariati et al., 2011; Siddique et al., 2016). Shariati et al. (2011) investigated the treatment of synthetic petroleum refinery wastewater in a 10-L membrane sequencing batch reactor with polyethylene flat sheet membrane module under different HRTs (24, 16 and 8 h) and achieved a high removal efficiency of 97% with relatively low OLRs (58 ± 12, 64 ± 5 and 61 ± 4 mg/L), no significant influence of HRT on COD removal was observed. Razavi and Miri (2015) also used a HF-MBR for real petroleum refinery wastewater treatment and a removal efficiency of 82% was achieved when HRT was 36 h (flux 0.846 L/m^2/h) with influent COD of 600 mg/L. In different studies, the effect of HRT on the operational performance might vary greatly, probably resulting from the discrepancies in operational parameters, feed characteristics (influent concentration/composition), biomass characteristics (i.e., particle size distribution, extracellular particle substances, microbial community, metabolic activity, etc.) and reactor configuration. Up to date, the widespread adoption of MBR technology is still hindered due to the prominent membrane fouling (Anjum et al., 2021). The degree of membrane pollution has a certain relationship with membrane structure. Amonge the commonly used membrane modules, hollow fiber membrane bioreactor (HF-MBR) has become the focus in the performance improvement and application research of membrane materials due to much higher packing density and separation productivity (Zhong et al., 2021).

Therefore, the purposes of this study were to: (i) comprehensively investigate the stability and long-term performance of HF-AnMBR treating simulated PTA wastewater, especially pollutant removal and methane recovery; (ii) analyze the effect of biopolymers and granular sludge characteristics on membrane fouling under various HRTs; and (iii) explore the response of microbial community under different HRTs.

For achieving these purposes, a lab-scale HF-AnMBR fed with synthetic PTA wastewater has been operated over 200 days. Different physiochemical parameters, including alkalinity, effluent proteins/polysaccharides, organic matter removal, and biogas production, were investigated to evaluate the process stability and long-term performance. The anaerobic biomass properties, such as extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) content and particle size distribution (PSD), were detected to identify the key factors governing membrane fouling. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to observe biomass morphology. Furthermore, 16S rRNA gene sequencing methodology was used to explore the evolution of microbial community structures over time.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 HF-AnMBR configuration and operation conditions

A lab-scale cylindrical plexiglass HF-AnMBR (height 480 mm, and radius 70 mm), with an effective working volume of 2.8 L, was constructed for treating synthetic PTA wastewater ( Fig. 1). A poly tetra fluoroethylene (PTFE) hollow-fiber membrane module (φ58 mm × 400 mm, max. temp. < 40 °C, pure water flux 40 L/m^2/h (LMH), and transmembrane pressure (TMP) range 50–30 kPa), with a total surface area of 0.1 m^2 and a nominal pore size of 0.1 µm, was used in the experiment. The hollow-fiber membrane was placed at the bottom of reactor and biogas was recirculated intermittently at a biogas sparing rate of 5.0 L/min by a vacuum pump (JH12-65, Zhourui, China) to provide shearing force on membrane surface. Both the influent and effluent processes were controlled by rate-adjustable peristaltic pumps (Model YZ 1515x, China). A digital pressure gauge (SIN-Y290, Sino measure, China) was used to measure the TMP. The operational temperature was maintained at 37 ± 1 °C by a thermostat water bath (YCX-6, Moer, China). All the pumps were controlled by digital timer to adjust the HRT in each stage.

The inoculated granular sludge was collected from a lab-scale UASB treating real PTA wastewater in our lab. The synthetic wastewater contained (COD: ~ 3545 mg/L) 1000 mg/L sodium acetate, 500 mg/L benzoic acid, 500 mg/L terephthalic acid, and 500 mg/L p-toluic acid (Kim et al., 2012); other nutrients included 1000 mg/L NaHCO_3, 200 mg/L NH_4Cl, 42.5 mg/L CaCl_2·2H_2O, 24.8 mg/L MgSO_4, 9.9 mg/L K_2HPO_4, 13 mg/L KHPO_4 and 1 mg/L trace metal solution (Liang et al., 2007). NaOH was added to enhance the solubility of pollutants and the pH of PTA wastewater was finally adjusted to around 7.0. The long-term experiment was run continuously over 200 days and was divided into nine stages (I–IX) according to HRT. HRT was stepwise shortened from 48 to 4 h with the corresponding OLR being increased from the initial 1.6 ± 0.1–19.3 ± 0.8 g COD/L-reactor/d. The detailed operational conditions are listed in Table 1.


2.2 Biochemical analysis

The pH was measured by pH meter (pHs-25, Leici, China). The alkalinity, COD, total solids (TS) and volatile solids (VS) were measured according to the Standard Method (APHA, 1998). Biogas composition was monitored by a gas chromatography (GC-2014 C ATF/SPL, Japan) equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (SHINAGAWA W-NK-0.5). Three types of EPS in anaerobic granular sludge, i.e., S-EPS (slime EPS), LB-EPS (loosely bound EPS) and TB-EPS (tightly bound EPS), were extracted in accordance with the heating extraction protocols (G. Zhen et al., 2013). Proteins (PN) were determined by the corrected Lowry procedure at 750 nm with bovine serum albumin as the standard (Bo et al., 1996), and polysaccharides (PS) were measured by the phenol-sulfuric acid method at 490 nm using glucose as the standard (Dubois et al., 1956). The particle size distribution of biomass was estimated by a laser particle size analyzer (Beckman LS13320, USA) with a measurement range from 0.01 to 3500 µm.


2.3 Morphology and microstructure of biomass

Morphology of granular sludge was characterized by field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi S-4800, Japan). The samples were prepared as the details depicted by G.Y. Zhen et al. (2013). The samples were washed with 0.1 M phosphate buffer solution (PBS, pH 7.4) for three times, fixed at 4 °C for 3 h, submerged in 2.5% glutaraldehyde solution (pH 7.2–7.4), and then washed with PBS for six times. Finally, it was continuously dehydrated with 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90%, 95% and 100% ethanol (per 15 min) and then air-dried for SEM observation.


2.4 Multiple fluorescence labeling in CLSM observation

Spatial microstructure of membrane foulants was visualized by CLSM (Leica, TCS SP8 STED 3X, Germany). The polysaccharides, lipids, proteins and total cells were stained with concanavalin A (ConA), Nile red, fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) and SYTO 63 respectively according to the previously reported method (Yuan et al., 2015). The samples were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde for 30 min, and then washed with PBS solution for three times. Subsequently, 20 μL SYTO63 was dropped on the samples and incubated in the dark for 30 min 1 M sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO_3) buffer was used to keep the unprotonated form of the amino group. Then, the FITC solution (10 g/L) was dropped on the samples, and stored in the dark for 30 min. ConA (0.25 g/L) labeling was performed in the same procedure. Finally, Nile red (0.1 mg/mL, prepared in acetone) was stained for 10 min. During each labeling process, the samples were rinsed three times with PBS to remove excess staining reagent. The labeled samples were then stored in PBS at 4 °C for further observation.


2.5 DNA extraction and microbial community structure analysis

The anaerobic biomass samples were collected from the bottom of the bio-reactor and stored in − 80 °C. The population structure of bacteria and archaea was analyzed by 16S rRNA to study the effect of operation conditions on microbial community. DNA was extracted from the biomass and washed with PBS for three times with an ultraclean Soil DNA Isolation Kit according to the manufactures instructions. DNA samples were stored in − 20 °C. Microbial communities were stained by 16S rRNA gene sequence and amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using the oligonucleotide primers of 341F (5′GTGCMGCCGCGGTAA-3′) and 806R (5′-GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-3′) (Zhi et al., 2019). After that, the selected PCR samples were purified and quantified. Sequencing was performed using the GS-FLX Titanium platform. The PCR samples were run on 1% agarose gel electrophoresis and DNA band with the correct size was excised. In total, 3085, 4983 and 6476 effective high quality V4 tags (average length of 318 bp) were obtained from pyrosequencing of different stage samples respectively.


2.6 Membrane fouling characterization

The fouled membrane module was taken out at the end of operation, and filtration test was conducted to identify the membrane resistance distribution according to the following steps (Lu et al., 2021; Niu et al., 2020): (i) aerated for 2 h to remove surface loose cake layer; (ii) aerated for another 2 h at the rate of 60 mL/min to remove tightly bound gel layer; (iii) backwashed with a 2000 mg/L NaClO solution at the rate of 60 mL/min for 2 h and soaked for 24 h to further chemically clean organic pollutants; and (iv) immersed in 3000 mg/L citric acid solution for 2 h to remove inorganic pollutants. TMP and membrane flux was recorded to estimate the recovery of membrane filtration performance. Membrane fouling behaviors were analyzed by the resistance-in-series model and calculated following Eqs. (1)–(6).

where, R_t, R_c, R_g, R_org, R_inorg, and R _m are the resistance of total, cake layer, gel layer, organic matter and inorganic matter and inherent resistance (m^−1), respectively; TMP is the transmembrane pressure (kPa); μ is the viscosity coefficient of liquid (Pa· s); k is the slope (kPa/LMH) in the graph of membrane flux; and J is the flux (m^3/m^2/s).


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Overall performance and stability over long-term operation

The long-term stability and effluent quality of the HF-AnMBR are exhibited in Fig. 2. The pH and alkalinity are two important parameters to evaluate enzyme activity and fermentation pathway, which alters biogas production kinetics. As illustrated in Fig. 2a, the influent pH kept around 7.5 during the long-term operation, falling within the optimized pH range of around 6.5–8.0 for methanogenic consortium. Although the effluent pH presented a slight fluctuation within the range of 8.3–8.8, some regular changes can be observed. Specifically, the change of effluent pH was very smooth (around 8.5 ± 0.2) at the beginning (start-up/I, and II) when the OLR was at very low level (1.60 ± 0.11 and 1.92 ± 0.17 g-COD/L-reactor/d), and then it increased slightly to about 9.0 ± 0.1 (III, IV, and V). As the OLR was further increased from 3.69 ± 0.09 g-COD/L/d to 19.30 ± 0.85 g-COD/L-reactor/d (VI, VII, VIII, and IX), pH slightly decreased from 8.7 ± 0.1–8.4 ± 0.2. This result can be explained by the fact that excessive OLR inhibited the methane production due to the toxicity of organic compounds present in PTA wastewater. Correspondingly, alkalinity was also examined to measure the buffering capacity of anaerobic system. Higher alkalinity enhances the system neutralization capability to maintain a stable pH value. As can be observed from Fig. 2b, the change of alkalinity was consistent with the pH. In stage I, total alkalinity with the average of 5217 ± 370 mg-CaCO_3/L after 30 days of operation. In stage II, it exhibited a slight drop to an average level of 3935 ± 80 mg-CaCO_3/L, whereas the level was still in the normal range of 1000–5000 mg-CaCO_3/L (Li et al., 2018). Consequently, the system still maintained a stable pH level and a high process stability. After that, it was maintained in a favorable range of 3400–5200 mg-CaCO_3/L with unobvious fluctuations (III, IV, and V), indicating the occurrence of dynamic balance between alkalinity consumption and supply/regeneration. Consequently, although the system suffered a high-concentration OLR shock at shorter HRTs (VI, VII, VIII, and IX), the alkalinity was still maintained at around 4500 mg-CaCO_3/L. Overall, the comparatively higher alkalinity indicated that the PTA-fed HF-AnMBR system had a strong buffer capacity and was able to efficiently treat PTA wastewater at high OLRs.

The concentrations of SPN (soluble proteins), SPS (soluble polysaccharides) and ammonia nitrogen in the effluent were measured and are depicted in Fig. 2c–e, respectively. The concentrations of SPN and SPS in the effluent changed greatly due to the different OLRs and the dynamic balance of microbial metabolism. In the first few stages (start-up/I, and II), both PN and PS showed a high concentration. After a period of adaptation, SPN and SPS fluctuated in a certain range of 165.2 ± 10.5 mg/L and 26.5 ± 0.0 mg/L in the later stages, respectively (Fig. 2c and d). This fluctuation can be attributed to the following two aspects: (i) the inherent toxic effect of PTA wastewater on microorganisms caused the lysis of microbial cells, resulting in the liberation of intracellular proteins, and polysaccharides; and (ii) the sense of self-protection drove microorganisms to secrete more extracellular polymeric substances. After a period of adaption, anaerobic microbes can successfully survive in such harsh environment and maintained a robust metabolic activity. In this context, the concentrations of SPN and SPS in effluent remained basically stable. Regarding ammonia nitrogen, the concentration of ammonia nitrogen was relatively low at the beginning. Although it showed an obvious increase from day 60 onward (Fig. 2e), its value (45.3 mg/L) was far less than the inhibitory concentration (1500–3000 mg/L) for methanogenic microorganisms reported in the literature (Rajagopal et al., 2013).


3.2 COD removal and methanogenic activities under various HRTs

COD removal and methane production under different HRTs were recorded and the corresponding results are displayed in Fig. 3. Fig. 3a shows the variations in total COD in the influent/effluent and COD removal efficiency. During the start-up stage, the effluent COD gradually dropped from the initial 1780 mg/L to the final 1300 mg/L， with the average removal efficiency of 48.9 ± 9.1%. In stage I (HRT 48 h, OLR 1.6 ± 0.1 g-COD/L-reactor/d), COD concentration in the effluent was maintained at around 900 mg/L with average removal efficiency of 71.0 ± 5.9%. In stage II (HRT 42 h, OLR 1.9 ± 0.1 g-COD/L-reactor/d), HF-AnMBR showed a relatively high stability and the COD removal efficiency kept at an average level of 71.6 ± 3.6% with the effluent COD of as low as 970 mg/L. The ideal pH and alkalinity provided a favorable anaerobic environment for microorganisms, and thus the population and activity of PTA-degrading microorganisms increased considerably. In stage III (HRT 36, OLR 2.1 ± 0.2 g-COD/L-reactor/d), because of the maintenance of bioreactor, the metabolic activities of anaerobic microorganisms were impacted to a certain degree, which resulted in a low COD removal of 57.5 ± 3.6%. Later, in stage IV (HRT 30, OLR 2.8 ± 0.2 g-COD/L-reactor/d), a satisfying performance improvement was observed, and the COD removal efficiency increased to 67.4 ± 4.1%; meanwhile, the effluent COD concentration dropped to 1100 mg/L. To investigate the operational performance under higher OLRs, HRT was further shortened stepwise from 24 h to 4 h from stage V to VI (namely OLR 3.1 ± 0.3–19.3 ± 0.8 g-COD/L-reactor/d). As illustrated in Fig. 3a, an apparent decrease of COD removal was observed from 65.8 ± 4.1% to 63.9 ± 1.2%, 56.0 ± 2.5%, 53.4 ± 0.8% and then to 53.4 ± 1.8%. The corresponding effluent COD in each stage was 1197, 1055, 1047, 1200 and 1551 mg/L, respectively. The decreased COD removal can be attributed to the short HRTs and the high toxicity in the petrochemical wastewater, which led to the inhibition of the toxic matters accumulated in the HF-AnMBR system and brought a threat to the survival of microorganisms, thus reducing the COD removal and inhibiting methane generation. Similarly, when using anaerobic baffled reactor to treat petrochemical wastewater, Elreedy et al. (2019) also found that the COD removal decreased with the shortened HRTs.

The variations in biogas composition and production rate during the whole process are exhibited in Fig. 3b and c. At the beginning of start-up period (day 1–30), methane content in the biogas increased gradually from 11.1% on day 1–57.6% on day 30, during which biogas production rate fluctuated greatly. In stage I, with the continuous adaptation of methanogens to the environment, the methane content further increased to 68.6%, and the biogas production rate kept at 0.23 ± 0.07 L/L-reactor/d on the average level with the total COD removal of 1.09 g-COD /L-reactor/d. In stage II, the methane content suddenly dropped to 42.5% and then rebounded to 69.6%. This sharp drop of methane content might be related to the organic loading shock. In stage III, due to the maintenance of biogas circulating pump, plenty of outer oxygen entered the HF-AnMBR system, which might inhibit the enzyme synthesis of obligatory anaerobic species and lead to the rapid cell lysis (Botheju and Bakke, 2011). As a result, the gas composition fluctuated between 21.4% and 66.7%, and correspondingly the biogas production rate ranged from 0.03 to 0.20 L/L-reactor/d with an average total COD removal rate of 1.30 g-COD /L-reactor/d. In order to verify the recovery performance of the system for air leakage, the gas circulation system was artificially intervened on day 119. It can be observed that the methane composition gradually rose, and finally returned to the previous level. It can be concluded that despite the high sensitivity to operating conditions, the syntrophic culture involved in the system can still recover in a certain period. From stage IV, the biogas production began to recover and the system reached a steady stage. The methane content began to stabilize at around 65.4 ± 3.7% and the biogas production rate increased to 0.20 ± 0.02 L/L-reactor/d as the increase of total COD removal rate of 1.73 g-COD/L-reactor/d. From stage V, although the COD removal rate began to decline as HRT decreased, methane composition continued to increase and averaged 66.3%. Simultaneously, biogas production rate was closely related to the total COD removal rate, and it gradually increased, being on average of 0.33 ± 0.02 (V), 0.45 ± 0.02 (VI), 0.95 ± 0.08 (VII), 1.42 ± 0.17 (VIII), and 3.01 ± 0.15 L/L-reactor/d (IX), in accordance with the increased total COD removal rate from 1.81 to 2.26, 2.69, 4.13 and then 10.33 g-COD/L-reactor/d, respectively. The biogas production rate in stage IX was up to 12 times of stage I (0.23 ± 0.07 L/L-reactor/d), consistent with the increasement of HRT. The results demonstrate that the methanogens can adapt to highly toxic petrochemical wastewater gradually and possess perfect tolerance to high OLR. However, the methane recovery rate seemed much lower than the theoretical maximum of 0.35 L CH_4/g-COD_removed in the early stages. The reason for the low methane recovery rate could be attributed to the dissolution of methane in the effluent, the consumption of COD for the reduction of sulfate to hydrogen sulfide and sulfide by sulfate reducing bacteria, and the bioconversion of COD into anaerobic biomass (Zhen et al., 2016).


3.3 Membrane fouling at different HRTs

Membrane fouling is one of the key challenges to the wide application of AnMBR technology. Serious membrane fouling can lead to the increase of transmembrane pressure (TMP) and the decrease of membrane flux. The effect of HRT on membrane fouling was characterized by TMP variation. As shown in Fig. 4a, during stage I, membrane fouling was formed at a steady rate of 0.02 kPa/d. After a stable operation, TMP remarkably increased to 14.6 kPa as HRT was decreased to 42 h in stage II. It could be concluded that the increasing membrane flux has brought about a shock on microorganisms, and that the membrane pores began to be blocked by smaller biomass particles. It is worth noting that TMP has returned to a normal range after a short period of biogas sparing, and stabilized at around 1.8 kPa in spite of the decrease in HRT in stage III (HRT 36 h), indicating the membrane fouling in the early stages was reversible. During this period, TMP increased at a slow rate of 0.15 kPa/d. In sharp contrast, TPM jumped to the peak value of 25.1 kPa at a relatively high rate of 1.0 kPa/d when HRT was shortened to 24 h. In order to in-situ mitigate membrane fouling, biogas sparing was done intermittently during the following 24 h. Afterwards, TMP gradually dropped to around 5.0 kPa. A remarkable rise in TMP at the rate of 0.30 kPa/d was noticed from the middle of stage IV (HRT 30 h)-IX (HRT 4 h), presumably attributable to the decreased HRT and the formation of cake layer. Decreasing HRT means that more organic matters should be degraded by microorganisms in a certain time. Additionally, the high toxicity of PTA wastewater accelerated the death and lysis of microbial cells as well as the rupture and destruction of high-viscosity extracellular polymeric substances (EPS). Eventually, membrane fouling changed from simple membrane pore clogging to cake layer formation, which eventually caused the high TMP and unbalanced flux. Moreover, the variation of TMP was basically consistent with the changes of the inner TS and VS concentrations as described in Fig. 4b, which indicated that biomass concentration had played a vital effect on membrane fouling and TMP rise. After 207 days of operation, the hollow fiber membrane was cleaned in-situ and the membrane resistance distribution was measured. As shown in Fig. 4c, the gel layer fouling (R_g) was the main fouling layer, and its resistance value was 2.7 × 10^11 m^−1 accounting for ~ 49.8% of the total resistance (R_t). The second contributor was inherent resistance (R_m) of membrane, which was 1.2 × 10^11 m^−1 and accounted for 21.8% of the total resistance. However, the resistance caused by cake layer (R_c) was 7.5 × 10^10 m^−1, accounting for around 13.7% of R_t, which was differing from the commonly observed phenomenon in most of previous works where cake layer was the major resistance distributer (Lu et al., 2021). In comparison, the organic layer contributed less to membrane fouling, and its fouling resistance (R_org) was 5.9 × 10^10 m^−1, and only accounted for 10.8% of R_t. R_inorg merely accounted for 3.7% of R_t. Generally, microbial flocs, biopolymer compounds and dissolved organic will deposit on the membrane surface, blocking the membrane pores or forming cake layer. The low R_c in this study can be attributed to the shearing force generated by biogas sparing, which enhanced the detachment and the re-dispersion of foulants. Additionally, compared with flat membrane, the larger specific surface area of hollow fiber membrane benefited the shedding of biopolymer compounds due to biogas shaking, which is conducive to alleviating membrane fouling.

For further visualize the spatial distribution of organic biopolymers including proteins, α-D-glucopyranose polysaccharides, lipids and total cells in the cake layer, CLSM was carried out via two-dimensional (2D) merging and three dimensional (3D) overlapped graphs. Proteins (blue), α-D-glucopyranose polysaccharides (green), lipids (yellow) and total cells (red) were labeled with fluorescent substances, respectively. As can be seen from Fig. 5, the major biopolymers attached to the membrane surface were PN and PS secreted and released by microorganisms, which were regarded as the major contributors to gel-layer formation and membrane contamination. Most of them overlapped in many regions on the membrane. PS have very long molecular chains (molecular mass: (0.5–2.0) × 10^6 Da), and they can be associated with lectins, proteins, lipids etc. by electrostatic and hydrogen bonds in different physiochemical ways to form various types of chemical structures, thus resulting in either floc formation or networks (Sutherland, 2001). During the long-term operation, the continuous deposition and accumulation of high molecular metabolites on membrane surface raised the membrane resistance and decreased membrane flux. Also, the accumulation of biopolymers further tended to promote the adhesion of organic and inorganic flocs and microbial cells onto the membrane (Niu et al., 2020), accordingly accelerating the deterioration of the membrane. As expected, a certain number of cells and a small amount of lipids were observed to distribute evenly in the cake layer. The microorganisms can further produce more extracellular proteins and polysaccharides, which in turn accelerated the membrane fouling. Besides, cell lysis of microorganisms often occurs under the harsh circumstances, during which intracellular polymeric substances were released to deteriorate the membrane fouling.


3.4 Change of anaerobic biomass characteristics

The properties of anaerobic biomass, including extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) and particle size distribution (PSD) were measured to gain more in-depth insights into fouling mechanisms. EPS are a kind of high molecular biopolymers produced during metabolic activity or cell lysis, mainly containing proteins, and polysaccharides (Su et al., 2019). EPS can affect the properties of biomass and further strengthen membrane fouling (Meng et al., 2009). EPS of biomass mixture from different stages was extracted according to their spatial distribution in biomass flocs to identify the effect/contribution of each EPS fraction on/to membrane fouling. As illustrated in Fig. 6a, the distribution of different EPS fractions had changed significantly. EPS concentration decreased from the early stages of I-V and then it increased during the later stages. At the first two stages, the amount of S-EPS was much higher than LB-EPS and TB-EPS. The PN was the dominant component, with the corresponding concentration of 34.8 (HRT 48 h) and 23.4 mg/g-VS (HRT 42 h), while PS were 24.2 (HRT 48 h), and 23.0 mg/g-VS (HRT 42), respectively. High content of S-EPS during the first two stages indicated the possible occurrence of the cell lysis of microorganisms when they were subject to the harsh circumstances, which led to the liberation of intracellular polymeric substances and the increased S-EPS. After a period of adaption, the anaerobic microorganisms became adapted to the internal environmental conditions, as a result which, the metabolic activities began to recover and the EPS were produced. In this content, an obvious increase in EPS was noticed once again (VI-IX). As for the component, it is clear that the content of PN accounted for a high proportion whereas PS was very low, and it was almost negligible from stage IV onward. Especially, stages V and VI ushered in the highest PN/PS ratio reaching 7.5 and 7.3, respectively. This observation was in good agreement with that noticed by Cheng et al. (2018). Moreover, the sudden increase in PN concentration of TB-EPS in stages VII and IX was in accordance with the rapid increase of TMP. Because of highly hydrophobicity and strong adhesion force attributed by PN, biomass easily attached onto membrane surface via strong chemical bonds (Lu et al., 2021). This result further proved that membrane fouling was largely attributed to the PN rather than PS. The similar conclusion was also upheld by Nie et al. (2017), who reported that the increase of PN content in EPS led to the blockage of membrane pore and the decrease of membrane flux.

Biomass particle size is closely associated with membrane fouling tendency, as smaller particles are more easily deposited on the membrane (Yang et al., 2019). In this regard, the PSD of anaerobic biomass collected at different stages was further analyzed. As shown in Fig. 6b, the PSD of all samples showed a multi peak curve. With the decrease of HRT, the particle size distribution didn’t change remarkably, except stage IV, when another new peak appeared in the range of 500–1000 µm. However, this phenomenon disappeared quickly, and there were no large particles in the later stages. Most particles were within 3.4–400 µm, and a small amount was within 400–1100 µm. Meyer et al. (2018) found that the particles in the range of 1–100 µm was more likely to block the membrane surface and cause membrane fouling. Therefore, the accumulation of fine particles on the membrane surface may lead to the decrease of membrane porosity and the increase of TMP. With shortening HRTs, the medium particle size of biomass decreased to an extent, consistent with the research results of Lu et al. (2018), who found that the granular sludge in the reactor decreased with the increase of OLRs (from 36 to 60 g-COD/L-reactor/d) when UASB reactor was used to treat methanol wastewater. Theoretically, TB-EPS with gel-like characteristic facilitates the flocculation and aggregation of flocs (Lu et al., 2018), which have a great impact on the particle size distribution (Zhen et al., 2017), but the particle size remained at a certain level during the whole process duo to the appropriate biogas aeration. It has been reported that biomass disintegration can be effected by long SRT and backwashing (Lopes et al., 2008). Previous studies have shown although high aeration intensity can hinder the formation of cake layer on the membrane surface and reduce the membrane fouling rate, it will conversely destroy the large particles in the mixed liquid and increase the proportion of small particles in the reactor (Berube et al., 2006). During the whole process, the biomass particle size did not change significantly, which might be attributed to the occurrence of the dynamic equilibrium between EPS flocculation and airflow shearing destruction. Air bubbles produce secondary flow, enhance the displacement of the concentration polarization layer, and will increase the cross-flow velocity in membrane surface (Zhang et al., 2009). Additionally, shear induced by two-phase flow (gas–liquid) promotes turbulence and fluid instabilities to strengthen the convective flow of particles away from the membrane (Wibisono et al., 2014).

SEM analysis was further carried out to characterize the morphological structure of biomass and the attachment/distribution behaviors of key microorganisms in the aggregates. The biomass particles in initial (HRT 48 h), middle (HRT 30 h), and final phase (HRT 4 h) of the experiment were selected for further observation. As shown in Fig. 7, there were great differences in biomass morphology between different stages. At the beginning of the experiment (Fig. 7a), the surface of the biomass was smooth, and the cocci-shaped microorganisms were distributed intensively. In the middle stages, as demonstrated in Fig. 7b the biomass had a relatively denser microstructure than those collected in the early stage. The individual microbial cell was plump and obvious in shape; the diameter of the short bacilli cells was around 1.2 µm. The microbes instinctively survived and grew within the granular sludge grooves to avoid being washed out. In the final stage, the secretion and flocculation of EPS were enhanced obviously with the increase of ORL, and especially a higher content of TB-EPS was identified to deposit onto the surface of biomass. It could be found that there were rod-shaped and cocci-shaped microorganisms distributed and embedded in biomass. Ultimately, the anaerobic microorganisms were almost surrounded by the macromolecular metabolites, thereby accelerating the stability and integrity of granules.


3.5 Response of microbial species to various HRTs

To track the evolution of microorganisms within the HF-AnMBR system, microbial community structure was analyzed by 16S rRNA high-throughput pyrosequencing during the whole process. The relative abundances of bacterial community are illustrated in Fig. 8.

In anaerobic digestion process, microbes display a crucial role in degrading aromatic pollutants. The hydrolysates of these small molecules can be dissolved in water and provide low-toxicity micromolecules for methanogens in successive metabolism. As depicted in Fig. 8a, a remarkable transformation of bacterial community was observed with the variation of HRT. At plylum level, Proteobacteria, Acetothermia, Patescibacteria and Euryarchaeota were the dominant bacterias in all samples, followed by Bacterroidetes, Chloroflexi, Thermotogae, and Synergistetes. Proteobacteria is the main group of bacteria in anaerobic digestion system, which plays an important role in the hydrolysis and acidification of organic matters, and provides a sufficient substrate for the subsequent methane production (Xiang et al., 2019). The relative abundance of Proteobacteria in stage I and II was 14.0% and 13.2%, respectively. From stage III onward, the strain gradually became dominant, with the relative abundance being around 26.3%. Proteobacteria was assigned to Syntrophus, Syntrophorhabdus, Desulforhabdus, Desulphovibrio and Desulfomonile at genus level (Fig. 8b), which were reported to play important roles in phenol, benzoic acid, and terephthalic acid degradation through the syntrophic partnership with methanogens (Nobu et al., 2015; Perkins et al., 2011; Sieber et al., 2012). It is of note that the relative abundance of these genera maintained a stable relative abundance in the later stages after a short time of acclimation, indicating that Proteobacteria has a strong survival ability to high ORL and high toxicity, coinciding well with the findings of Luo et al. (2016) in treating phenanthrene.

The second dominant bacteria was Acetocermia, which accounted for 27.3% in stage II. Acetothermia was sensitive to HRT variation, and its relative abundance fluctuated greatly in the later stages. Patescibacteria, a kind of acidogenic bacteria, accounted for 26.3% of abundance in stage I, but it declined in the later stages as well. In comparison, Bacterroidetes showed a obvious rise in the relative abundance from 4.0% (HRT 48 h) to 10.0% (HRT 12 h). Bacteroidetes is a main acid-producing bacterium secreting various enzymes to degrade complex carbon compounds, including cellulose and hemicellulose into acetate, propionic acid, formic acid and succinic acid (Hatamoto et al., 2014). Moreover, Chloroflexi also shared a considerable abundance in the reactor, ranging from 2.8% to 9.3%. Chloroflexi with a high tolerance to organic loading are often found in anaerobically digested sludge, denitrification sludge and granular sludge, and it can degrade carbohydrates into acetate (Rincón et al., 2013). Such phylum was also observed in our study. Whereas, the relative abundance of Synergistetes and Spirochaetes both increased obviously with HRT decrease. Previous studies have revealed that Spirochaetes can convert carbohydrates or amino acids into acetic acid, hydrogen and carbon dioxide, and promote the degradation of toxic and harmful substances, such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, dichloromethane, pollutants in crude oil and chloroethylene (Imfeld et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2015). Although the relative abundance of other bacteria was very low, their synergistic effect in the process of pollutant transformation cannot be ignored. On the whole, with the progress of the reaction, PTA-degrading microbes were domesticated and the microbial diversity tended to be optimized.

Methanogenesis is a process in which carbon dioxide or methyl compounds are converted into methane by methanogens. As shown in Fig. 9, archaeal representatives were mainly classified as acetoclastic Methanoseata and hydrogentrophic Methanolinea at the genus level (relative abundance > 5.0%), followed by Methanomethylovorans and Methanomassiliicoccus. Acetic acid is considered to be the most abundant substrate, and it can be utilized by acetoclastic methanogens to produce CH_4 (CH_3COOH → CH_4 + CO_2, △G ^0′ = − 75.7 kJ/mol). H_2-utilizing methanogens reduce CO_2 to CH_4 while simultaneously oxidizing hydrogen (4H_2 + CO_2 → CH_4 + 2 H_2O, △G ^0′ = − 131 kJ/mol). In the methane-recovering bioconversion process, all the stages were dominated by Methanosaeta, which are the major methanogens in ecological environment with the ability of degrading acetate into methane (Kong et al., 2018). Methanosaeta is reported to produce CH_4 from acetic acid in two ways: (i) the direct conversion into CH_4, and (ii) the conversion into acetyl-CoA and other intermediates to produce CH_4 (Lykidis et al., 2011). The relative abundance of Methanosaeta reached roughly 70.0% in stage I, drastically decreased to 40.0% in stage II, and later was maintained at around 70.0%. Afterwards (stages VII, VIII, and IX), its relative abundance decreased with the increase of OLR. The variation of Methanosaeta abundance would eventually affect methane production to a great extent.

Candidatus-methanofastidiosum was detected as the second most abundant archaea, however, the specific biological function still remains unidentified. Methanobacterium is a hydrogentrophic methanogen, and its relative abundance is closely related to the concentration of hydrogen (Su et al., 2019). The relative abundance of Methanobacterium changed significantly, and it firstly reached a maximum value of 26.4% at HRT 42 h, then was maintained at around 7.1% at HRT 18–36 h and finally reduced to 4.3% at shorter HRT. Methanolinea was reported to be mesophilic hydrogenotrophic methanogen capable of utilizing H_2/CO_2 and formate (Sakai et al., 2012). Methanolinea possesses a complete set of Eha hydrogenase enzyme subunits (Lykidis et al., 2011), adjacent to formyl-methanofuran dehydrogenase, which is able reduce CO_2 to formyl-methanofuran (Anderson et al., 2008); moreover, complete sets of ech (tadcc3040–tadcc3045) and mbh (tadcc17854–tadcc17865) hydrogenases able to provide H_2 for the reduction of heterodisulfide by the heterodisulfide reductase were also detected in Methanolinea (Anderson et al., 2008). Methanomassiliicoccus can produce methane by using methanol, methylamine and hydrogen as electron donors (Becker et al., 2016). Usually, in methane-recovery anaerobic system, a low and narrow-range concentration of hydrogen was suggested essential to maintain the syntrophic association between the H_2-producing bacteria and H_2-using methanogens. Although the abundance of hydrogentrophic mathanogenises were low and some of them even disappeared in the later stages, their role in PTA wastewater treatment system cannot be overlooked. The irregular variation of the archaea indicated that the methanogens are more sensitive to environment parameters in bioconversion system. To achieve an excellent COD removal and high methane recovery, exploring the new strategies to improve the function of methanogens is further needed.


4 Conclusions

This study demonstrated the great potential of HF-AnMBR for PTA wastewater treatment and methane recovery. The comprehensive results showed that under the condition of 0.29 g-COD/L/d and HRT of 24 h, the performance of HF-AnMBR was the most stable with the average COD removal of 65.8 ± 4.1%, and methane production rate was 0.33 ± 0.02 L/L-reactor/d with methane content of about 66.3%. With the continuous operation, a slight membrane fouling was observed, which might be caused by the increase of microbial secretion/lysis and the adsorption and precipitation of colloidal substances. Membrane resistance distribution analysis demonstrated that the main fouling was dominated by gel layer, accounting for 49.8% of total resistance. The observation and component identification of cake layer by CLSM further showed that the membrane fouling (increased TMP) was largely caused by the microbial metabolites (such as proteins and polysaccharides). 16S rRNA gene sequencing showed that the suitable HRT could regulate the microbial diversity, promote the proliferation of organic-degrading bacterias (Proteobacteria, Acetocermia, etc.) and accelerate the biodegradation of PTA wastewater; Methanoseata, and Methanolinea were the dominant methanogenic archaea for carbon bioconversion into methane, providing a guarantee for highly efficient methanogenesis. This study shows that HF-AnMBR has a great potential as a new strategy to promote simultaneous PTA biotransformation and renewable energy recovery.


 CRediT authorship contribution statement

Guangyin Zhen: Conceived the projects, and contributed to the conception, Design, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Revised it critically for important intellectual content and gave final approval of the version to be submitted. Xueqin Lu: Conceived the projects, and contributed to the conception, Design, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Revised it critically for important intellectual content and gave final approval of the version to be submitted. Dilibaierkezi Kudisi: Contributed to the Data curation and original drafting. Chaoting Zheng: Participated in the discussion for the quality improvement. Yue Wang: Participated in the discussion for the quality improvement. Teng Cai: Participated in the discussion for the quality improvement. Lingtan Hu: Participated in the discussion for the quality improvement. Wanjiang Li: Participated in the discussion for using new software, Methodology. Ruiliang Zhang: Participated in the discussion for using new software, Methodology. Yizhi Zhang: Participated in the discussion for using new software, Methodology. All authors have critically proof read the manuscript.


Appendix A Supplementary data

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at….