TITLE: 1H NMR metabolomics of microbial metabolites in the four MW agricultural biogas plant reactors: A case study of inhibition mirroring the acute rumen acidosis symptoms


1 Introduction

Design and operation of full-scale reactors for waste management are an exercise in ecosystem management. Reactor communities contain thousands of interacting microbial populations, even when a single substrate is provided (Fernandez et al., 2000). Parallel processing of substrates through complex interconnected metabolic pathways has been proven to be a more efficient and robust approach in many systems. Parallel processing of substrate was correlated with greater functional stability of methanogenic reactor communities, despite nutritional perturbations (Hashsham et al., 2000), as mixed microbial systems are functionally equivalent to a network of metabolic activities of many interdependent populations working together as a community to convert organic substrates to methane via the well-recognized anaerobic food chain. However, the inhibition of microbial activity by perturbation takes place well before these perturbations in metabolic flow are reflected at the level of the residing complex microbial communities and their community structure (Kolbl et al., 2017).

Today's intensive management systems of industrial biogas plants encourage the inclusion of large amounts of less conventional substrates to support high methane yields and enhance cost efficiency (Kolbl et al., 2014, 2016; Murovec et al., 2015) (substrates with high content of nitrogen, sulphur, salts and/or lipids: molasses, vinasses, paper pulp sludges, organic fractions of municipal solid wastes, discarded oils and fats). However, as the use of such substrates cannot be comprehensively tested by comparative batch or semi-continuous lab-scale and pilot-scale experimental tests within the prolonged time frames (e.g. years) and in combinations with many different co-substrates (Kolbl et al., 2014), these practices ultimately lead to development of suboptimal process conditions and decreased biogas yields next to accumulation of various products such as intermediate degradation products and metabolites. In turn, the suboptimal process conditions further affect metabolite turnover, the extent of hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis next to hydrogenotrophic or aceticlastic methanogenesis conducted within microbial functional guilds, and can result in partial and complete inhibition of those processes (Westerholm et al., 2016; Jiang et al., 2018).

The intensive biogas plant management systems encourage the inclusion of large amounts of various plant, animal and industry based substrates next to those originating from wastewater treatment plant or organic fraction of municipal solid waste, that fluctuate on annual and seasonal basis. The high-energy substrates that contain high availability of fermentable carbon next to the repetitive daily loading practices with high organic loading rates in terms of volatile solids (>6 g VS/L) often lead to accumulation of large amounts of short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) and to the acidification of the reactor contents, decrease of alkalinity (dissolved inorganic carbon) and the inhibition of the underlying anaerobic processes (i.e. cessation of biogas production). The characteristics of this pathological condition (pH < 6.5, SCFA buildup) largely correspond to acute or sub-acute rumen acidosis symptoms (ARA or (S)ARA, respectively) observed in high-intensity animal production (Ametaj et al., 2010; Nocek, 1997). The enormous energy requirements of high producing cattle require rations of substrates with increasing dry matter intakes and levels of concentrate feeds, i.e. higher energy feedstuffs. These make it increasingly difficult for the animal to provide a ruminal environment that stays within all of the narrow constraints relevant for microbial physiology, and hence make rumen increasingly susceptible to (S)ARA (Hernández et al., 2014; McCann et al., 2016; Ishaq et al., 2017). (S)ARA is defined as fermentation disorder in the rumen, characterized by a lower than normal ruminal pH (rather a continuum of degrees of ruminal acidity) reflecting an imbalance between microbial production, microbial utilization, and ruminal absorption of short-chain fatty acids that have a significant impact on microbial activity, rumen function, and animal productivity and health (Hernández et al., 2014; McCann et al., 2016; Ishaq et al., 2017).

Accumulation of SCFAs (acetate, propionate, butyrate, iso-butyrate, valerate, iso-valerate, formate, lactate, etc.) has long been associated with a decrease in microbial activity in biogas reactors and process failure. In theory, the surplus of easily available organic carbon for hydrolysis and acidogenesis leads to increased SCFA content, decrease in pH that both affect underlying microbial activities of the complex anaerobic microbial communities (Bacteria, Archaea, Protozoa, Fungi, Viruses) (McCann et al., 2016; Ishaq et al., 2017). The same parameters encountered in anaerobic digestion process (devoid of the host uptake of SCFA, buffering, systemic detoxification in (S)ARA) result in reduced rates of methanogenesis and process inhibition. Therefore, the observed reduction in process functionality (biogas production or meat/milk production, respectively) are tightly linked to the buildup of SCFA and systemic acidification.

So far, most conventional approaches targeted a limited number of biogas reactor compound classes, i.e. SCFA, alkalinity, SCFA/alkalinity ratio, pH, ammonia, total soluble organic carbon concentration (TSOC) and have not attempted a comprehensive metabolomic characterization of the full-scale biogas digesters (Kolbl et al., 2014, 2017; Sasaki et al., 2014).

Metabolomics is an emerging field of ''omics'' science that uses high-throughput approaches, such as ^1H NMR spectroscopy (Ametaj et al., 2010; Ravanbakhsh et al., 2015; Beckonert et al., 2007). High-resolution NMR spectroscopy is a quantitative nondestructive, noninvasive, nonequilibrium perturbing technique that provides detailed information on solution-state molecular structures, based on atom-centered nuclear interactions and properties (Beckonert et al., 2007). It is a robust and reliable technique for metabolomic applications with high reproducibility as it allows the detection of a wide range of structurally diverse metabolites simultaneously down to the low micromole per liter range in 4–5 min acquisition time using current-generation high-field spectrometers (Ravanbakhsh et al., 2015; Beckonert et al., 2007). The peak integrals relate directly to the number of protons giving rise to the peak, and hence to the relative concentrations of the substances in the sample. Absolute concentrations can be obtained if the sample contains an added internal standard of known concentration (Beckonert et al., 2007; Sket et al., 2018). This approach is generally coupled to multivariate analyses to extract comprehensive metabolic information within the system enabling exploration of complex interactions between metabolites on metabolic pathways producing methane in response to exposition to environmental parameters and elucidation of the associated parameters explaining the observed differences in metabolites. In addition, two dimensional (2D) NMR spectroscopy can be useful for increasing signal dispersion and for elucidating the connectivity between signals, thereby helping to identify biochemical substances (Beckonert et al., 2007).

Although metabolomics is becoming a well-established high-throughput technique in analyses of metabolic imbalances in human intestinal tract and health in general, to our knowledge, only a few studies have used modern metabolomics approaches to explore the metabolic imbalances in ruminants (Ametaj et al., 2010; Saleem et al., 2012; Lee et al., 2012), and to the best of our knowledge, no such study has been published so far dealing with analyses of the full-scale biogas reactors.

In this study, we hypothesized that ^1H NMR spectroscopic profiling would provide a more comprehensive view on microbial metabolites associated with reduction in biogas production in order to give insight into the function-metabolite association in the full-scale biogas digesters. For this we used ^1H NMR spectroscopic profiling along with multivariate statistical analysis to compare metabolomes of the six biogas reactors in a full-scale 4 MW agricultural biogas plant under fully operational and also under inhibited conditions. Multivariate analyses such as permutational multivariate analysis of variance (perMANOVA) and similarity percentages (SIMPER) were used to assess the significance and extent of differences between biogas reactors whereas artificial neural networks (ANN) were used to identify the key metabolites responsible for inhibition and their network of interaction.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Full-scale biogas reactor sample collection

The mesophilic agricultural biogas plant Vučja vas (Slovenia) was monitored during the start-up phase of its six anaerobic biogas reactors until its full 4 MW output and over the course of 2.5 years (Kolbl Repinc et al., 2018). This plant contains six biogas reactors (6 × 3931 m^3 = 23,586 m^3) and two post-reactors (2 × 5350 m^3 = 10,700 m^3) in total volume of 34,286 m^3.

The whole biogas plant is divided into two lines connecting biogas reactors F1-3 and biogas reactors F4-6 through overflow (Fig. 1 ). In addition to these main lines, substrate mixtures prepared in mixing shafts can be independently directed to any of the biogas reactors as all have their own sideway ports that enable boost injections (Fig. 1). The basic characteristics of biogas reactors F1-F6 (temperature, TSOC, pH, ratio slopes between 275 nm - 295 nm slope and 350 nm - 400 nm slope (Sr) as measure of molecular complexity of TSOC) were determined as described before (Kolbl et al., 2014, 2016, 2017) and are presented as Fig. S1.

Complete biogas plant is controlled and regulated via supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) system, which is located at the area of electro-technical chambers of biogas plant. Electricity is produced by four gas motors (MWM, Germany), each with 1 MW_el capacity range. Online gas sensors for all six biogas reactors and post-reactors monitored biogas levels that served as data sources in this study. Gas analysis was monitored by online gas analyzing device (ADOS, Germany) (Kolbl Repinc et al., 2018).

The timing and weight of substrates that were dosed into mixing chamber were determined by difference in weight of fully loaded excavator bucket and empty excavator bucket. Each mixing chamber received equal amounts of substrates that were pumped into biogas reactors according to the operation plan to ensure stable biogas production. The average monthly consumption of substrates was as follows: silage that was dosed in all six biogas reactors was 159.2 ± 28.4 t, cow manure 57.4 ± 11.9 t, corn meal 22.1 ± 4.9 t. Average percentage of substrates in each daily loading was composed of 66.7% of corn silage, 24% of cow manure and 9.3% of corn meal. All biogas reactors received mixtures in similar percentage of all substrates each day as planned. Average VS (% total solids (TS)) of corn silage, cow manure and corn meal were 94.6%, 81.5% and 94.1%, respectively. Average TS (%) of corn silage, cow manure and wet corn meal were 38.4%, 21.1% and 88.7%, respectively. Total solid and volatile solids of substrates were measured using the collected samples according to American Public Health Association (APHA) (Kolbl et al., 2014; APHA, 2005). Average organic loading of biogas reactors was between 9.8 g and 10.7 g VS/l day and was within the limits described before for the same biogas plant (Kolbl et al., 2014).


2.2 Test case

A monitoring series of samples was collected from anaerobic biogas reactors F1-F6 essentially as described before (Kolbl et al., 2014) to characterize biogas plant functioning and to identify uncharacteristic events of operation. Functional data of the biogas plant (biogas, electricity (Vučja vas, internal data)) collected routinely through the SCADA and ADOS systems were used to retrieve the baseline data describing general daily operation of the biogas reactors functioning at 90% of planned biogas production and sustaining the energy production of the 4 MW Vučja vas biogas plant. A technical event was identified as test case: (i) biogas reactors F2 and F4 received 1.5 and 1.25 of their planned organic loading, respectively; (ii) overloading was followed by clear inhibition event within 24 h; and (iii) samples were available for all six biogas reactors in Vučja vas biogas plant sample collection. Presentation of actual biogas production was not feasible due to confidentiality agreement.

Sampling of biogas plant reactors used in this study was conducted through existing plumbing loop system of 16 cm internal diameter installed on outer biogas plant reactor walls designed originally for maintenance purposes. After complete mixing of biogas reactors, 4 m^3 of content were pumped to flush the sampling installation. The samples of each biogas reactor were subsequently collected through this sampling tubing into four 40 L canisters (160 L) and transferred directly to lab where analytical samples (n = 10; vol = 50 mL) were collected for analyses and NMR sample preparation. Replicate samples and subsamples were aliquoted, centrifuged 5 min at 3000 g and snap-shot frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −25 °C as reported before (Kolbl et al., 2014).


2.3 Biogas reactor fluid preparation, NMR spectrum acquisition and analysis

Samples were thawed at room temperature and centrifuged at 10,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C to remove fine particles. Samples were filtered through 0.22 μm HPLC compatible filters (Millipore, Germany) and 400 μL aliquots were mixed with 200 μL ^1H NMR buffer as described before (Beckonert et al., 2007) and stored at −25 °C until analysis.

Phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) was prepared by weighing 1.443 g NaH_2PO_4, 0.263 g NaH_2PO_4, 2 mM TSP and 1 mM NaN_3 into 50 mL volumetric flask. 10 mL of D_2O was added and filled up to 50 mL with Milli-Q water. Before analysis, samples were thawed at room temperature, centrifuged at 12,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C. 550 μL of each sample was transferred into 5 mm NMR tube.

To target extracellular metabolites ^1H NMR spectra were acquired on an Agilent Technologies DD2 600 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with 5 mm HCN Cold probe. 2D experiments were measured on Agilent Technologies (Varian) VNMRS 800 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with 5 mm HCN Cold probe. All experiments were measured at 25 °C. ^1H NMR spectra of the samples were recorded with spectral width of 9.0 kHz, relaxation delay 2.0 s, 32 scans and 32 K data points. Water signal was suppressed using Double-pulsed field gradient spin echo (DPFGSE) pulse sequence. Heteronuclear single quantum coherence spectrum (HSQC) was acquired with spectral widths of 9.0 kHz and 40 kHz for ^1H- and ^13C-dimensions, respectively, 1536 complex points for ^1H-dimension, relaxation delay 1.5 s, 160 number of transients and 128 time increments. Total correlated spectrum (TOCSY) was measured with ^1H spectral widths of 7.0 kHz, 4096 complex points, relaxation delay 1.5 s, 32 number of transients and 144 time increments. The ^1H and 2D spectra were apodized with an exponential function and a cosine-squared function, respectively, and zero filled before Fourier transform. NMR spectra were processed and analyzed using VNMRJ (Agilent/Varian) and Sparky (UCSF) software and MestReNova.

The resulting spectra were consequently analyzed in two complementary ways: (i) human expert chemometric untargeted metabolomics, including 2D spectra, and (ii) targeted quantitative metabolomics using Chenomx NMR Suite version 8.3 (Chenomx, Inc) as also described before (Ametaj et al., 2010). For the latter, all spectra were randomly ordered for spectral fitting using ChenomX profiler as described before (Sket et al., 2018; Chenomx, 2017). Metabolites analyzed in this study were thus independently identified using two approaches, (i) the expert analysis guided by the 2D NMR spectroscopy, and (ii) with the support of high-throughput approach adopting the Chenomx Compound Library extended by Human Metabolome Data Base (Wishart et al., 2013). Although the latter database gives access to the use of chemical shift profiles of 674 compounds, two separate subanalyses were run. Initially, the number of profiles was limited to those metabolites commonly identified in rumen and biogas reactors in past publications, whereas in the second subanalysis the complete set of chemical shift profiles of all 674 compounds were used.

Three different approaches to asymmetric sparse matrix data analysis were adopted (Legendre and Legendre, 2012). Each compound concentration was (i) normalized by dividing the measured concentration into the total concentration of all metabolites in that sample; (ii) Box-Cox or log2 transformed; (iii) corrected for the TSOC determined as described before (Kolbl et al., 2017).

Sample spiking was used to confirm the identity of several spectral signatures observed in the recorded NMR spectra. Compound mixes were prepared and amended to selected samples and also dH_2O at 25–1500 μM range to test if the corresponding ^1H NMR signals responded as expected. Selected samples were also freeze-dried at −15 °C to 50%, 25% and 10% of original volume and resuspended in D_2O buffer as described above to test the response in ^1H NMR signals. Finally, separate aliquots of selected samples, the spiked and freeze-dried samples and those prepared in dH_2O were also analyzed by GC-FID approach following extraction of SCFA as routinely used in our past studies (Kolbl et al., 2014, 2016, 2017; Kolbl Repinc et al., 2018; Sket et al., 2017) to map the results of GC-FID and ^1H NMR, as was done in other sample matrices before (Sket et al., 2017, 2018). The concentration and standard deviation of results obtained in this study were compared to those obtained in past studies using comparable approaches and protocols of sample preparation (Ametaj et al., 2010; Sket et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2012).


2.4 Statistical analysis

The significance of difference in the metabolic characteristics of various groups of samples was tested using perMANOVA and expressed as an overlap in nonmetric multidimensional scaling (nm-MDS) trait space using program PAST (Hammer et al., 2001). SIMPER was used to identify the metabolites contributing significantly to the differences between the groups of biogas reactors. To test for types of data structures the resulting data matrix was analyzed first using non-metric multidimensional scaling (nm-MDS) (Gower and Euclidean distance measures), the dimensionality reduction selected through stress function and inspection of Shepard's plots of correspondence between target and obtained ranks.

The resulting coordinates derived from dimensionality reduction were analyzed through kriging using Kernel density function to assess existence of different types of structures in data (data point density distribution on contour plots (n_density centers = 1, i.e. highly centered data; n_density centers = n_data points, i.e. evenly distributed data)).

Instead of raw or Bonferroni correction of p-values, the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) significance correction for multiple comparisons (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995; Benjamini and Yekutieli, 2001) in multivariate data was used as described before (Sket et al., 2017). When a large number of statistical tests is performed, there is possibility that some tests will have P values less than 0.05 purely by chance even if all null hypotheses cannot be rejected and are hence in fact true. Adjusting the false discovery rate using BH procedure is a more powerful method, as it limits false-negative results properly (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).

The assembled data on biogas reactors (F1-6), injection lines (L1-2), locations within the line (LwL1-3) and biogas production as measure of functionality, were superimposed into nm-MDS ordination to identify the parameters most associated with the variability in the metabolomic data as described before (Kolbl et al., 2017; Murovec et al., 2015).

In addition to SIMPER, ANN analysis was used to further elaborate the set of metabolites responsible for the separation of (i) fully active biogas reactors F1-F6 and the inhibited reactor states using one output layer; (ii) active and inhibited states of biogas reactor F2; and (iii) active and completely inactive reactor F2 states. Growth rate was set to change every 10 cycles. The input layer contained all recovered metabolites. Networks with one and two hidden layers were also tested. Learning rate was set to 0.6 with momentum 0.8. Every 100 cycles 25% of samples were randomly selected for validation. Average target error was set to 0.01 before stopping. Validation was set to stop when within 10% of desired output or after maximum of 3000 cycles.


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Fully functional and inhibited biogas reactors contained significantly different metabolomes

The baseline data describing general daily operation of the biogas reactors at the 4 MW Vučja vas biogas is presented in Fig. 2 . The 1.5 and 1.25 overloading of biogas reactors F2 and F4, respectively was followed significantly decreased biogas production deviating significantly from quartal 95% confidence interval limits. Although biogas production within biogas reactor F4 resumed, biogas reactor F2 remained inhibited (Fig. 2).

Analyses of anaerobic digestion metabolomes (Table S1) using ordination based on nm-MDS showed that most convex hulls of metabolomes from functional biogas reactors F1-F6 overlapped and covered the central area of ordination (Fig. 3 ). Based on the results of nm-MDS ordination the subsamples of each biogas reactor were quite similar, but not identical, despite homogenization of the full-scale reactors before sampling, the significant washout of sampling ports and despite the fact that all biogas reactors were fed with a substrate mix having same composition and characteristics. It is known that homogeneous feeding is one of the main obstacles in biogas plants and could be the main reason for the observed differences in the substrate composition/characteristics between the biogas reactors under general performance (Mulat et al., 2016; Junne and Kabisch, 2017).

The six parameters (Reactor, Line, Location within line, Replicate sample, Technical replicate, and Inhibition) were superimposed over metabolomics data in nm-MDS to identify the most important process parameters for the dispersion of metabolomics data (Fig. 3). Although the largest extent of variation in dataset was explained by the inhibition state (64.9%) and sampling effect (15.1%), the effect of other variables (Reactor (3.8%), Line (4.0%), Location within line (5.3%) and technical replicate (6.9%)) had a measurable, albeit comparatively smaller effects. These results suggest that in analyses of such large and stratified systems, spatial variability in sample collection process is significant despite stirring of the biogas reactors before sampling and subsampling using large volumes. In addition, the effect of technical replicates, despite small (6.9%), attests that the extent of analytical noise introduced by ^1H NMR scanning was indeed small. These analytical uncertainties were in essence associated with spectra acquisition and processing, spectral fitting and feature detection (Westerholm et al., 2016). Hence it can be concluded that a certain extent of variability due to the size of the system under analysis and subtle differences in the substrate composition were transferred into minor differences in the metabolic makeup of biogas reactors in line 1 and line 2 (Fig. 3). On the other hand, the metabolomes of inhibited biogas reactor F2 were markedly different and completely separated from those of fully functional biogas reactors F1-F6. Three different states related to the time of sampling (24 h, 48 h and 72 h) of biogas reactor F2 during its progressive transition to inhibited states were observed (Fig. 3) and characterized.

In order to assess the significance of the observed differences between groups of metabolomes derived from particular fully functional and operating biogas reactor, perMANOVA with BH correction was used. The metabolomes of biogas reactors F1-3 within the overflow Line 1 were not significantly different from each other (p > 0.05). Although biogas reactors F4, F5 and F6 were also organized as an overflow Line 2 and were similar to those of F1, F2 and F3 (Fig. 3), their metabolomes were significantly different from each other and differed also from the F1-3 group (p_same < 0.001, n_perm = 9999, total sum of squares = 38.96, within-group sum of squares = 28.7, F = 3.979). This shows that functional biogas reactors receiving the same type of substrate can have distinct metabolic make-up, however, these differences were smaller in comparison to the inhibited reactors.

The three progressively inhibited states of the biogas reactor F2 (24 h, 48 h and 72 h) were significantly different from each other and from the rest of metabolic states. Multivariate analysis showed that fully active reactors were clustered separately from the cases containing inhibited biogas reactor metabolites (Fig. 3) and were significantly different from other groups (perMANOVA, p < 0.001). Furthermore, the three distinct inhibited states of F2 were also significantly different from each other (p = 0.0008). This shows that the large extent of metabolic changes took place during this phase devoid of biogas production. Specifically, high concentration of propionate (24 mM; Table S1) were observed in the most inhibited stage of biogas reactor F2 (72 h; Fig. 2) in comparison to other preceding inhibited states in F2 or F4 (Fig. 3).

The nm-MDS ordination (Fig. 3) showed that also the metabolomes of reactor F4 were not overlapping with the other fully functional biogas reactors coinciding with a reduction in biogas production to below 70% of its long-term performance (Fig. 3). This shows that metabolomes of biogas reactor F4 (that was less overloaded as F2) were intermediate relative to other fully functional reactors in relation to the inhibited F2. The increased concentration of SCFA (acetate; Table S1) in F4 was the most important parameter distinguishing F4 from F5 and F6 biogas reactors within line2 (Table S1) as identified by SIMPER and ANN. The partial inhibition observed in biogas reactor F4 proceeded devoid of significant accumulation of propionate (Table S1) in this reactor apparently enabling subsequent alleviation of inhibition in biogas reactor F4.


3.2 Inhibited biogas reactors contained different set of metabolites

The SIMPER and ANN analyses were used to identify the most relevant metabolites contributing to differentiation between fully active metabolic states of biogas reactors F1-6 and the inhibited state of F2 (Table S1). The inhibited metabolomes as a group were enriched in acetate, caprylate, trimethylamine, thymine, pyruvate, alanine, xanthine and succinate (Table S1) and the potential functional implications of altered metabolite levels in reactor fluids are further discussed below.

One of the most interesting observations from this study was the increase in the concentrations of methylated amines (trimethylamine and methylamine) in inhibited biogas reactor F2. To our knowledge, this is the first report of such an association between inhibition and methylated amines levels (trimethylamine, methylamine). Furthermore, bacterial decarboxylation of amino acids such as glycine, tyrosine and phenylalanine (Ametaj et al., 2010; Davis and De Ropp, 1961; Hill and Mangan, 1964) and the degradation of plant lipids (Hill and Mangan, 1964; Neill et al., 1978) have been shown to contribute to the production of methylated amines in ruminants (Ametaj et al., 2010), low pH being an additional contributing factor (Fig. 4 ). The pH drop to below pH 6 is a typical hallmark of (S)ARA in ruminants that absorb these metabolites into blood stream and detoxify methylated amines into hydrogen peroxide and formaldehyde that are further degraded and removed from blood stream. To our knowledge, although there is no information about the pathways involved in detoxification of these metabolites in biogas digesters, Hill and Mangan (1964) and Neill et al. (1978) (Hill and Mangan, 1964; Neill et al., 1978) showed their endpoint conversion into methane by rumen microbial community. However, the accumulation of trimethylamine can simply reflect the inhibition of these methanogenic groups and thus accumulation of methylated amines as substrate, especially as also the pH in F2 was below the optimal pH for the methanogenesis (pH < 7) (Fig. 4). This indicated that the accumulation of trimethylamine and methylamine might simply be due to imbalance between its production-consumptions rates due to the 1.5 organic loading of F2 in this study (Table S1).

Another set of metabolites that was associated with biogas reactor inhibition contained xanthine and thymine next to alanine, derivatives of nucleic acid degradation and cell death of bacteria, respectively (McAllan and Smith, 1973; Trent et al., 2006). The increased concentrations of xanthine and alanine in fluid of inhibited biogas reactors appear to be biomarkers of widespread cell lysis and a fundamental change in microbiota. This shows that during functional inhibition cell lysis took place, liberating substantial amounts of DNA that most probably interfered with metagenomic and metatranscriptomic inventories of microbial communities, obscuring the small-scale rearrangements in microbial communities (Wagner et al., 2008). Another explanation for this observation could also be the fact that in addition to cell lysis, xanthine and alanine accumulation may also be related to inhibition of their degradation.

The elevated levels of alanine and pyruvate seem to be connected as alanine can be produced via an amination of pyruvate via transamination reaction coupled to alanine-aminotransferase (Örlygsson et al., 1995). The high levels of pyruvate and ammonia therefore favor the production of alanine in rumen (Ametaj et al., 2010) and in biogas reactors as well (this study). Excess pyruvate is derived from excess availability of easily degradable carbohydrates in anaerobic digestion, suggesting substrate overload of the full-scale biogas reactor with its concomitant decrease in pH (Fig. 4).

Our study confirms previous findings with regard to higher concentrations of SCFA with inhibition of full scale biogas reactors based on conventional GC-FID measurements of SCFA (Franke-Whittle et al., 2015). As acetate was significantly increased during inhibition, devoid of significant changes in lactate (Fig. S3), this points again to the large similarity between the biogas inhibition and development of ARA and (S)ARA symptoms in ruminants (Ametaj et al., 2010). In addition to SCFA, also medium chain fatty acids (MCFA) such as caprylate was detected in inhibited reactors. As n-caprylate has only been produced when ethanol was the electron donor (Angenent et al., 2002; Kucek et al., 2016a) ethanol apparently had to be available as electron donor preceding sampling as no significant difference in ethanol content was observed in metabolomes. In addition, the high organic loading and biomass recycle used in the first demonstration of the conversion of a real organic waste into n-caprylate, devoid of biogas production (Kucek et al., 2016b), pointed to the fact that during cessation of methane production other bioproducts of high added value are being formed. In addition, the detection of phenylacetate in absence of propionate, a known inhibitor of methanogenesis, gave an indication of process imbalance.

In addition to acetate, however, also propionate (Table S1) and low pH (Fig. 4) specifically delineated the most inhibited stage of biogas reactor F2 (72 h; Fig. 2) from other preceding inhibited states (Fig. 3).

The differences in the metabolic fingerprint between inactive and fully active biogas reactors observed in this study (Fig. 3; Table S1) resembled closely the metabolites differentiating (S)ARA inflicted and healthy rumen metabolomes (Ametaj et al., 2010). Next to a decrease in pH, the following six classes of characteristic metabolites out of eight found in (S)ARA, acetate, methyl-amines, xanthine, alanine, pyruvate, caprylate (ethanol derivative), were found to be increased in inhibited biogas reactors as well (Table S1). This is of particular interest as this suggests that establishing conditions resembling (S)ARA within biogas reactors might in fact create favorable conditions for the growth and metabolic activity of pathogenic bacteria, similar to those observed in (S)ARA rumen samples (Westerholm et al., 2016).

The nature of (S)ARA and the fact that it was recently recognized as a continuum of degrees of ruminal acidity (Hernández et al., 2014) is in-line with past observations on anaerobic biogas reactors subjected to substrate perturbation, such as shock loading (Fernandez et al., 2000; Hashsham et al., 2000; Fernández et al., 1999). Methanogenic systems are examples of networks that contain numbers of fermentative, syntrophic and methanogenic subpopulations with distinct biochemical pathways that work together as community to convert a range of substrates to organic acids and methane via well-organized anaerobic food chain (Fig. S3). Substrates and feed are generally processed through multiple routes in parallel and hence provide higher functional stability of the system because of substrate partitioning to several populations (Hashsham et al., 2000) (Fig. S3A). However, with increasing substrate load the ability to shift the increased electron and carbon flow through various alternative guilds in efficient manner is reduced. Consequently, the imbalanced flow through anaerobic network (Fig. S3B) gives rise to progressive sequential substrate processing and accumulation of intermediates (SCFA, lower pH) through the activity of the resilient bacterial functional guilds (Fernandez et al., 2000; Hashsham et al., 2000; Fernández et al., 1999) resulting in the characteristic of (S)ARA (Ametaj et al., 2010) and biogas inhibition and their similar metabolite makeup (Fig. S3B) (this study) (Ametaj et al., 2010). Finally, the excessive substrate loading shock results in further buildup of intermediates, such as lactate and propionate, characteristic of both ARA and severely overdosed biogas reactors, approaching the processes taking place during the ensiling (Fig. S3C).

The existence of other metabolites present in biogas reactor at various levels of inhibition and makeup (Table S1) show that with improved metabolic overview of realistic anaerobic biogas reactors important insights into the functioning of microbial guilds can be obtained. The observed within-reactor heterogeneity in each of the biogas reactors in this study implies that stable biogas production can take place in presence of heterogeneous metabolic environment. On the other hand, the partial inhibition of F4 with 1.25 organic overload represented a situation that resulted in biogas production just outside the 95% confidence intervals and that was efficiently resolved by resilient microbial community. In contrast, the 1.5 organic load resulted in inhibited biogas reactor F2, lower pH, within which a progressive number of pathways became inhibited including methanogenesis and caused variations in the concentration of characteristic metabolites described in this study due to changes in their rates of production or consumption.


3.3 1 H NMR as early warning tool for high-throughput identification of metabolites

The measurement of conductivity, pH, SCFA and SCFA/alkalinity ratio next to ammonia concentration represent the conventional approaches to parametrization of the anaerobic digestion processes at industrial scale in order to maximize methane yields and economic sustainability. Metabolomics provides a relatively complex, but affordable means in comparison to current metagenomics, transcriptomics or proteomics to gain understanding on the key metabolites associated with the inhibition of microbial communities. The consistency of our ^1H NMR data with those reported before for the rumen ecosystems using ^1H NMR (Ametaj et al., 2010; Saleem et al., 2012; Lee et al., 2012) and also with those obtained using conventional analytical techniques (Kolbl et al., 2014, 2017) for anaerobic digestion justifies that NMR based metabolomics is a reliable approach for the evaluation of metabolic events at full scale biogas reactors. In addition, the levels of detection (μM) reported in this study are consistent with the levels reported before for the ^1H NMR approach in general, as well as for rumen samples analyzed by ^1H NMR as described before (Ametaj et al., 2010; Ravanbakhsh et al., 2015; Beckonert et al., 2007; Sket et al., 2018; Saleem et al., 2012; Lee et al., 2012). The variations among the replicates in the form of standard deviations observed in our study are of the same magnitude as observed in other studies analyzing real world complex samples of biological origin using ^1H NMR (Ametaj et al., 2010). This shows that 1H NMR can serve as a novel screening tool for early identification and characterization of anaerobic processes in the near future.

There are several major advantages to using ^1H NMR for fast analyses of complex metabolomes and include minimal sample preparation without the need for derivatization, robustness and high reproducibility, the fact that it is highly quantitative and non-destructive, as samples can be recovered and stored for other analyses (Gromski et al., 2015). In addition, NMR offers reduced analysis time per sample (4–5 min), the use of curated databases of chemical shift profiles relevant to anaerobic processes and the increasing extent of automation, that all enable a sufficient high-throughput of analyses. The complexity of analyses are being further alleviated by increasing benchmarking and automation, ongoing development of chemical shift databases (Wishart et al., 2007, 2009, 2013), algorithms (Ravanbakhsh et al., 2015; Hao et al., 2014), publication and adoption of best practices, standard operating procedures and standards in sample preparation, scanning and data analysis (Markley et al., 2017). Finally, human expert chemometric untargeted metabolomics, including 2D-NMR spectra, can be invoked in cases where difficult to resolve and unknown metabolites are encountered in samples.

Among major limitations of ^1H NMR are the costs of the analytical equipment and the complexity of data analysis (Gromski et al., 2015) that is comparable to other ‘omics fields. Another limitation is the decision to target either intracellular metabolomes of the residing microbial biomass (Sasaki et al., 2014) or extracellular metabolites (i.e. aliquots of samples after centrifugation and filtration) (this study) (Ametaj et al., 2010). Third, in any application of ^1H NMR to biogas reactors that receive liquid substrates, additional samples would need to be investigated to cover metabolites including the dissolved organic matter originating from the substrate itself in order to determine also the extent of undegraded substances or degradation residues that could inhibit the receiving biogas reactors.


4 Conclusions

In this study, ^1H NMR spectroscopic profiling was used to provide a more comprehensive view of microbial metabolites associated with poor biogas reactor performance in a full-scale 4 MW mesophilic agricultural biogas plant under fully operational and also under inhibited conditions. Metabolomes of subsamples from each reactor were similar, but not identical, despite homogenization of the full-scale biogas reactors before sampling. Multivariate analysis showed that metabolomes of fully active biogas reactors were clustered separately from metabolomes from inhibited reactors and were significantly different. Furthermore, the three distinct inhibited states were significantly different from each other. The inhibited metabolomes were enriched in acetate, caprylate, trimethylamine, thymine, pyruvate, alanine, xanthine and succinate, exhibiting overlapping metabolites characteristic of the (sub)acute rumen acidosis. The consistency of our data with those reported before for rumen ecosystems shows that ^1H NMR based metabolomics is a reliable approach for the evaluation of in-depth metabolic events at full-scale biogas reactors. Last, it is important to point out that the accumulation of metabolites can be due to an increased production or imbalance between the production-consumption rates in the metabolic pathways of anaerobic degradation chain and may not necessarily translate to higher production of that compound.


 Contributions

BS proposed the study, and provided guidance to all co-authors. SK, ZP, DZ, RŠ conducted the experiment; collected samples; BM, BS, RŠ, DZ determined analyte concentrations. DM, KP, JP generated 1H NMR and ^1H-^13C PRESAT HSQCAD profiles, next to CRAFT analysis. BM, BS, DM, SK analyzed data and conducted calculations, including corresponding data analysis and figure preparation. BS wrote the manuscript, with revisions and contributions of intellectual content from all authors.


 Funding

This work was in part supported by the Slovenian Research Agency project J1-6732 to BS and core funding P2-0180 to SK, BS, and National Young Researcher Fellowship 37426 to RŠ. RŠ acknowledge the support of National Scholarship Programme (Planetary Emergencies: Medicine and Biotechnology) granted by the World Federation of Scientists for 2017/2018. The COST Actions ES1302: European Network on Ecological Functions of Trace Metals in Anaerobic Biotechnologies and FA1302: Large-scale methane measurements on individual ruminants for genetic evaluations are acknowledged for support during fruitful discussions and exchange of ideas during the final preparation of this manuscript.


 Role of the funding source

The funding source(s) had no involvement in study design, in the collection, analysis and interpretation of data, in the writing of the report, in the decision to submit the article for publication.


 Competing interests

The authors have no competing interests to declare.


Appendix A Supplementary data

The following are the supplementary data related to this article:


Appendix A Supplementary data

Supplementary data related to this article can be found at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.05.068.