TITLE: Mesophilic anaerobic digestion in a fluidised-bed reactor of wastewater from the production of protein isolates from chickpea flour


1 Introduction

Wastewater derived from the production of protein isolates from chickpea flour comprises mainly of wash waters from various operations including the following steps.1. Mixing of the raw chickpea flour with water, sulphite (0.25%, w/v) and a NaOH solution (6.25 N) preceding a centrifugation process for separation of solid and liquid fractions. 2. Second centrifugation of the liquid phase for separation of the small solids and liquid fraction. 3. Treatment of the liquid fraction with a HCl solution (6 N) to precipitate the protein isolate. 4. Washing of the protein concentrate resulting from the above-mentioned process to eliminate the residual HCl.

The effluents from the third and fourth steps have an organic matter concentration of between 7.4 and 9.3 g chemical oxygen demand (COD)/l, ranging the polluting load of the final wastewater of the whole process between 8.6 and 9.4 g COD/l.

These two wastewater streams, amounting to about 23 l/kg of processed chickpea flour, are combined together resulting in a viscous yellow liquid. The mixed final effluent is highly polluting and is characterised by a low pH and high chemical and biological oxygen demands and total solid (TS) contents. The high polluting power and large volumes of wastewaters generated can pose large-scale environmental problems.

Anaerobic treatment of moderate and high strength wastewaters with high biodegradable content presents a number of advantages [1–4]; for example, a quite high degree of purification with high-organic load feeds can be achieved, low nutrient requirements are necessary, small quantities of excess sludge are usually produced and finally, a combustible biogas is generated. The production of biogas enables the process to generate or recover energy instead of just-energy saving; this can reduce operational costs by a large margin compared with the high energy consuming aerobic process.

However, one of the most important problems in anaerobic processing of liquid wastes is the loss of biomass in systems with a high hydraulic loading rate. In order to solve this problem, reactors have been designed containing supports, which fix the biomass and result in high loading densities and small hydraulic retention times (HRT) [5,6]. With the increase of population density on the given support, there is an enhanced opportunity for cross-feeding, co-metabolism, and interspecies hydrogen and proton transfer, which may further stimulate the growth of microcolonies [7]. Among the bioreactors more commonly used for this purpose are fluidised-bed reactors, where bacteria colonise particles of a support medium, thereby increasing the surface available for bacterial growth [8].

The fluidised bed reactor is a biological process which has been demonstrated in various studies to be feasible for the treatment of both municipal and industrial wastewaters [9]. The use of small, porous, fluidised media enables the reactor to retain high biomass concentrations and thereby to operate at significantly reduced hydraulic retention times. Fluidisation also overcomes operating problems such as bed clogging and high pressure drop which would be encountered if such high surface area media were used in a packed bed reactor. A further advantage of using media to retain the biomass within the reactor is the possible elimination of the secondary clarifier. On the other hand, the significance of the nature of the support material to be colonised by the bacteria has been emphasised by several authors, since it influences the proportions in which the different types of microorganisms develop in the overall anaerobic biomass, the production and composition of biogas and the volatile fatty acid (VFA) degradation rates [5,10–17].

The aim of this work was to carry out an evaluation of the performance of anaerobic digestion process of wastewater derived from the production of protein isolates from chickpea flour using a fluidised-bed reactor containing microorganisms immobilised on saponite (magnesium silicate). This report discusses a laboratory-scale investigation with emphasis placed on the evaluation of substrate utilisation and gas production rates under different operating conditions at mesophilic temperature. On the other hand, purifying procedures involving fluidised beds require sturdy supports of low apparent density in order to reduce power consumption, which is the case with the medium assayed here.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Equipment

A laboratory-scale fluidised-bed reactor with total and working volumes of 1.5 and 1.0 l, respectively, was used in the experiments. The reactor had a settling mechanism intended to avoid loss of the solids acting as supports for the microorganisms. The reactor has been described in greater detail elsewhere [18]. The biogas was evacuated in a continuous fashion; the volume of methane produced being measured after removing CO_2 by adsorption into NaOH. The operating temperature of the reactor (35 °C) was maintained constant by means of an external jacket through which water from a thermostatic bath circulated.


2.2 Support

The support used to immobilise the bacterial biomass was a clay, saponite, selected on account of favourable kinetic behaviour in previous experiments with other types of food industry wastewaters [15,19,20]. Their features are described in detail elsewhere [14].


2.3 Wastewater

The composition and features of the wastewater derived from the production of protein isolates from chickpea flour are summarised in Table 1 , which lists the average values of seven separate analyses; there was virtually no variation (less than 5%) between analyses.


2.4 Inoculum

The reactor was inoculated with biomass from an industrial anaerobic reactor processing brewery wastewater. It was methanogenically active (pH 7.8) and its composition was: total suspended solids (TSS), 27.2 g/l; volatile suspended solids (VSS), 15.0 g/l; mineral suspended solids (MSS), 12.2 g/l.


2.5 Experimental procedure

The anaerobic reactor was initially charged with 300 ml of distilled water, 1000 ml of the inoculum, 200 ml of a nutrient-trace element solution and 15 g of the support. While larger amounts of support provided attachment sites for increased amounts of biomass, they also increased the apparent viscosity of the medium and hence hindered mass transfer and slowed down biodegradation. The composition of the nutrient-trace element solution used at the start-up of the reactor is given in Table 2 .

The start-up of the reactor involved stepped increases in COD loading and substrate concentration. During this period the organic loading rate (OLR) was gradually increased from 0.4 to 1.9 g COD/l per day over an 1-month period. During this acclimatisation step, the influent COD concentration was increased from 4.35 to 9.1 g/l.

This preliminary step was followed by a series of continuous experiments using feed flow-rates of 67, 77, 90, 105, 150, 166, 182, 202, 224, 245, 266, 288 and 357 ml per day of the wastewater described in Table 1, which correspond to hydraulic retention times of 14.9, 13.0, 11.1, 9.5, 6.7, 6.0, 5.5, 5.0, 4.5, 4.1, 3.8, 3.5 and 2.8 days, respectively. The bacterial biomass concentration remained virtually constant at 15 g VSS/l throughout the experiments. The biomass concentration (g VSS/l) was estimated according to the recommendation of Chen et al. [21].

Once steady-state conditions were achieved at each feeding flow-rate, the daily volume of methane produced and COD, pH, volatile acidity and alkalinity of the different effluents obtained were determined. Samples were collected and analysed for at least six consecutive days. The steady-state value of a given parameter was taken as the average of these consecutive measurements for that parameter when the deviations between the observed values were less than 3% in all cases. Each experiment had a duration of two to three times the corresponding HRT.


2.6 Chemical analyses

The following parameters were determined: total and soluble COD, pH, total solids, mineral solids (MS), volatile solids (VS), total suspended solids, mineral suspended solids, volatile suspended solids, volatile acidity, and alkalinity. All analyses were carried out according to the recommendations of the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater [22].


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Influence of organic loading rate on the COD removal efficiency in the reactor

Table 3 summarises the steady-state operating results including HRT, organic loading rates, total and soluble CODs, volatile acidity/alkalinity ratio and methane flow-rates. The total and soluble COD removal efficiencies observed at different OLRs are illustrated in Fig. 1 . In general, the percentage of COD removed decreased with increased OLR up to OLR values of 2.3 g COD/l per day, maintaining COD removal percentages of around 68% for these OLR values. For OLRs higher than this value a slight decrease in efficiency was observed. More than 68% of feed COD could be removed up to OLRs of 2.3 g COD/l per day, which indicates that the anaerobic fluidised-bed system is very effective.

The organic removal rates observed at different OLRs are illustrated in Fig. 2 . As can be seen, the rate of COD removal increased linearly with OLR up to OLR values of 2.1 g COD/l per day, the slope of the fitted line being 0.70, with a regression coefficient of 0.99. A decrease in the sequence was observed for OLRs higher than 2.1 g COD/l per day when the lowest HRTs (3.8, 3.5 and 2.8 days) were used. The attainment of high reactor biomass hold-up in the anaerobic fluidised-bed system, via the immobilisation of the microorganisms on the small, fluidised particles, contributed to such a good system-efficiency. In addition, the production and subsequent release of methane from the biofilms could have had a profound effect on the equilibrium biofilm thickness (and, therefore, equilibrium biomass hold-up) in the reactor, because the resulting effervescence might have sloughed the biofilms off the clay particles.


3.2 Operational parameters

The total and soluble effluent CODs of the anaerobic fluidised-bed reactor increased with OLR, as illustrated in Fig. 3 . Such an increase in the effluent COD was paralleled by a similar increase in the effluent volatile fatty acids, as can be seen in Fig. 4 . This seems to indicate that, at higher OLR, the effluent soluble chemical oxygen demand (SCOD) is largely composed of the unused volatile acids produced in the reactor.

Because the buffering capacity of the experimental system was maintained at favourable levels with excessive total alkalinity present at all loadings, the rate of methanogenesis was not affected. The experimental data obtained in this investigation indicate that a total alkalinity in the range of 1090–2130 mg/l as CaCO_3 was sufficient to prevent the pH from dropping to below 6.9 at OLRs of up to 2.7 g COD/l per day. The pH in the reactor remained approximately constant at HRTs higher or equal to 3.5 days, with 7.7 and 6.9 as extreme values. This stability can be attributed to carbonate/bicarbonate buffering. This is produced by the generation of CO_2 in the digestion process which is not completely removed from the reactor as gas. Buffering in anaerobic digestion is normally due to bicarbonate as carbonate is, generally, negligible if compared to the bicarbonate (carbonate/bicarbonate ratio is equal to 0.01 for pH 8.2). The buffering guards against possible acidification of the reactor giving a pH of the same order as the optimal for methanogenic bacteria [23].

The VFA/alkalinity ratio can be used as a measure of process stability [23]: when this ratio is less than 0.3–0.4 the process is considered to be operating favourably without acidification risk. As was observed (Table 3), the ratio values were lower than the suggested limit value in all cases except in the experiments corresponding to the lowest HRTs studied. Between HRTs of 14.9 and 3.5 days the VFA/alkalinity ratio was always lower than the above-mentioned failure limit value, and the VFA values were always lower than 500 mg/l (as acetic acid). However, at a HRT of 2.8 days, a considerable increase of the VFA/alkalinity ratio was observed in the reactor (1.88), which was due to a considerable increase in the VFA concentration (1630 mg/l, as acetic acid) with a simultaneous decrease in alkalinity (720 mg/l as CaCO_3).

The SCOD removal efficiencies observed at different HRTs are plotted in Fig. 5 . Between 14.9 and 4.5 days, COD removal decreased slightly from 96.8 to 85.2%. At an HRT of 4.1 days a marked decrease in efficiency was observed (68.3%). In consequence, it appears that the performance of the anaerobic fluidised-bed system becomes independent of HRT, provided that the HRT of the reactor is maintained above 4.5 days. Below that the performance of the reactor deteriorates sharply.


3.3 Methane yield coefficient

The volumetric methane production rate as a function of OLR is illustrated in Fig. 6 . The volume of the methane produced per day increased linearly with increased OLR up to OLR values of 2.7 g COD/l per day, after which a marked decrease was observed over the range tested. Apparently the activity of methanogenic bacteria was not impaired up to OLR values of 2.7 g COD/l per day because of the adequate buffering capacities provided in the experimental system. Higher biomass hold-ups in the reactor would also promote such high activities of methanogenesis. Nevertheless, the methane production rate decreased from 0.608 to 0.202 l per day when the OLR was increased from 2.7 to 3.0 g COD/l per day. This decrease in the methane production at the highest OLR values might be attributed to an inhibition of the methanogenic bacteria at high OLR values, which caused an increase in effluent VFA contents and VFA/alkalinity ratios, as can be seen in Table 3. Specifically, VFA content increased from 480 to 1630 mg/l (as acetic acid) when the OLR was increased from 2.7 to 3.0 g COD/l per day.

The experimental data listed in Tables 1 and 3 were used to determine the methane yield coefficient, Y _p. As the volume of gas produced per day, V _methane (litres CH_4 per day), is assumed to be proportional to the amount of substrate consumed, thenwhere S _0 and S are the substrate concentration (g COD/l) at the digester inlet and effluent, respectively, and q is the feed flow-rate. By plotting Eq. (1) in the form V _methane against q(S _0−S) (Fig. 7 ), a virtually constant value of 0.34±0.03 l CH_4 STP/g COD consumed (95% confidence limits) was obtained over the substrate concentration range used; this agrees with the data reported in the literature [6]. Taking into account that, theoretically, 0.35 l of methane is produced per gram of COD removed, when assuming that all of the incoming COD is transformed into methane and considering null the biomass growth and cell maintenance [24], the effectiveness of the anaerobic reactor in converting wastewater derived from the production of protein isolates from chickpea flour into methane at mesophilic temperature is clearly demonstrated.


4 Conclusions

The results of this study demonstrate that a mesophilic anaerobic treatment using a fluidised-bed reactor, with saponite (magnesium silicate) as support material, is highly effective for the purification of wastewater derived from the production of protein isolates from chickpea flour. Such a system can be used successfully as an alternative for treatment of this wastewater. COD removal efficiencies in the range of 96.8–85.2% can be achieved by the reactor when operated at OLRs of between 0.58 and 2.10 g COD/l per day, HRTs of between 17.9 and 4.5 days and average feed COD concentrations of 9.1 g/l. Under the operating conditions evaluated in this investigation a HRT equal or higher than 4.5 days is recommended in order to ensure a good system-efficiency. The high performance may be attributable to the appropriate carrier material and the adequate acclimatisation of the biomass and start-up of the reactor performed to minimise the undesirable wash-out of slow-growing methanogenic bacteria.

Because the effluent COD in the anaerobic reactor at higher OLR is largely produced by the unused volatile acids produced in the reactor, it is essential that the buffering capacity of the system should be maintained with the presence of an adequate amount of alkalinity. The experimental data obtained in this study indicate that a total alkalinity in the range of 1090–2130 mg/l as CaCO_3 was sufficient to prevent the pH from dropping to below 6.9 for OLRs of up to 2.7 g COD/l per day.

The methane yield coefficient, Y _p, was 0.34 l CH_4 STP/g COD consumed.