TITLE: Effect of temperature and organic loading rate on siphon-driven self-agitated anaerobic digestion performance for food waste treatment


1 Introduction

Food waste (FW) management is becoming more and more important because of the rapid urbanization and population growth (Curry and Pillay, 2012). Although separate collection of FW has already been a common practice in many countries, the treatment methods of FW vary according to the country’s policy. In general, FW can be treated through landfill, incineration, home/centralized composting, or on-site/centralized anaerobic digestion. However, conventional landfill treatment of FW is almost no longer allowed in many countries due to shortage of landfill sites and the negative effects on the environment (Lee et al., 2013; Battistoni et al., 2007). Recently, anaerobic digestion (AD) is widely recommended as an environmentally friendly technology for FW treatment due to its energy-efficiency and biogas production as a renewable energy (Westerman and Bicudo, 2005; Zhang et al., 2007). It has been suggested as an effective way of centralized anaerobic FW treatment that FW is crushed first by food waste disposers (FWDs), and then sent to a wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) with an AD plant through sewerage systems. This could be an efficient way to avoid problems related to transportation, order and storage (Marashlian and El-Fadel, 2005). Thus, the centralized disposal/collection of FW through FWD has already been widely used in several countries such as Australia, Brazil, Canada, Japan and US (Bolzonella et al., 2003). However, centralized FW treatment based on FWD may cause an increase in organic load or toxic waste (oil and grease) load at WWTP, and corrosion risk of cement pipes related to the increased H_2S production in sewerage systems (Bernstad et al., 2013). Based on the above discussion, pretreatment of FW instead of the direct discharge into sewerage is likely to be a promising way, while on-site anaerobic treatment with FWD can become a potential method for the FW pretreatment.

Recently, most studies have focused on the co-digestion of FW and animal manure/sewage sludge (Jabeen et al., 2015; Dai et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2011), or the effect of trace metal on the fermentation performance (Facchin et al., 2013; Zhang and Jahng, 2012). Few of the studies concern on the development of an efficient anaerobic treatment technology for FWD pretreatment before the sewerage discharge (Sankai et al., 1997). Kim et al. (2015) summarized that the average moisture content of several FW including kitchen waste, mixed FW and restaurant food was 84% with 16% solids content. To verify appropriate solids content for a wet AD, Park et al. (2017) studied the effect of dilution with water on the performance of anaerobic FW treatment. However, based on these earlier studies, 1% of solid content in FWD-treated wastewater is at a rather low level for the wet AD. In this case, there is a need to reduce hydraulic retention time (HRT) for an efficient treatment under a proper OLR despite of the slow growth rate of anaerobic microorganisms. Temperature is considered as one of the most important factors determining the AD performance. It is widely accepted that because of its higher metabolic rates, specific growth rates and pathogens destruction rates, the thermophilic AD could improve performance and contribute to higher methane production at a high OLR condition compared with the mesophilic one (Sánchez et al., 2001; El-Mashad et al., 2004; Kim et al., 2006). However, in terms of thermodynamics, thermophilic condition is good for endergonic reactions such as acetogenesis, but not favorable to exergonic reactions such as hydrogenesis and methanogenesis (Appels et al., 2011). However, a weak point of thermophilic AD is the unstable performance in the presence of inhibitory substance. Over-load in the AD system is likely to be related to accumulation of the inhibitory substances such as volatile fatty acids (VFAs), thus causing a reduction in the biogas production. Moreover, sudden changes in OLR can often lead to an unstable digestion process (Akunna et al., 2007; Rincón et al., 2008). It is therefore very important to evaluate the effects of temperature and OLR on the on-site anaerobic treatment of FWD-treated wastewater.

The newly developed siphon-driven self-agitated anaerobic reactor (SDSAR) has already demonstrated the comparable performance in simulated FW treatment compared to the completely stirred tank reactor (CSTR) (Kobayashi and Li, 2011). Since the siphon mixing in the SDSAR can promote the dispersion of solid materials and reduce deposits without electricity consumption, it is expected to be applied to the biological waste and wastewater treatment as a cost-effective and environmentally friendly technology. However, the scum problem occurred in SDSAR under mesophilic condition treating FW from a cafeteria (Kobayashi et al., 2013). In order to evaluate the effect of operating temperature on the on-site anaerobic FW treatment, two SDSARs were run in parallel for comparison between mesophilic and thermophilic conditions. The performance of the two reactors in biogas production, organic removal, and solid removal under different HRT (hydraulic retention time) and OLRs was studied. The COD recovery from output at different OLRs was evaluated. To explore the effect of temperature and OLR on the process performance inside the SDSARs, solid distribution, pH and mixing frequency were also investigated.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 SDSAR system

A schematic diagram of the SDSAR system applied in this study is shown in Fig. 1 . This reactor was made of polyvinyl chloride with an effective volume of 10 L. The temperatures of the reactor were assured by water jacket and heaters. In this study, the mesophilic and thermophilic reactor temperatures were controlled at 35 ± 1 °C and 55 ± 1 °C, respectively. The substrate was added into chamber 1, thus biogas produced in this chamber would push the liquid down until the liquid level falls to the bottom of the U-tube in the reactors. Then, the produced biogas in chamber 1 could enter chamber 2 and 3 through the U-tube rapidly. Consequently, the liquid levels in chambers 2 and 3 would decrease while the liquid level increases in chamber 1. This whole process could be considered as siphon mixing completed once in the reactor. To determine the mixing frequency, the pressure in chamber 1 was recorded by the digital pressure gauge (Krone, KDM30) once per 5 min. The FW was pumped from the substrate tank with an effective volume of 7 L. The cooling water was supplied with a cooler to the water jacket of this tank to maintain it at a temperature of around 4 °C. Sampling ports were placed in the substrate tank, on one side of the reactor body, and in the biogas collection system.


2.2 Feed stock and seed sludge

The raw and cooked FW was collected from the canteen of the National Institute of Environmental Studies, Japan. A disposal machine (Cuisinart, DLC-NXJ2PS) was used to disintegrate the raw FW. Since the assessed water use in FWD systems may vary largely from 7.2 to 19.3 L/kg FW as concluded by Bernstad et al. (2013), we follow their method which adds 12 L water to 1 kg FW for the laboratory FW grinding. To maintain a solid content of about 5% for direct methane fermentation, this crushed FW was settled in a settlement tank with an effective volume of 15 L for 24 h. Then, the settled FW was transferred and stored in the substrate tank. To prevent the trace elements deficiencies in the reactors, Fe, Co and Ni were added artificially. The trace elements concentration in the substrate was as follows: 100 mg-Fe/L, 10 mg-Co/L, and 10 mg-Ni/L, respectively (Wu et al., 2015). In this study, no extra buffer was added into the substrate. The mesophilic reactor was inoculated with sludge harvested from a full-scale mesophilic digester treating sewage sludge. The thermophilic reactor was inoculated with sludge acclimated from the mesophilic sludge over one month, according to the method described in the previous paper (Bou et al., 2005).


2.3 Operational conditions

Two SDSARs were operated for 325 (mesophilic) and 420 (thermophilic) days, respectively. At the beginning (day 1–105) of this experiment, two reactors were feed with the same FW and operated at the same HRT conditions (20 d). Then, the HRT was changed to 10 d to evaluate the effect of OLR on the reactor performance (day 106–249). Since scum problem happened at this condition in the mesophilic reactor, the HRT was then set at 15 d for two reactors during day 250–325. From day 326 to 420, only the thermophilic reactor was operated. The HRTs were maintained at 15 (day 326–357), 7.5 (day 358–395), 5 (day 396–420), respectively.


2.4 Analytical methods

The biogas production in two reactors was measured with the µFlow gas meter (Bioprocess Control AB). The biogas contents (CH_4, CO_2 and N_2) were determined by a gas chromatography (GC-8A, Shimazu). The temperatures of the injector, detector and column were set at 160 °C, 160 °C and 100 °C, respectively. The influents and effluents of both reactors were sampled for chemical oxygen demand (COD_Cr), pH, volatile fatty acids (VFA), TS and VS twice a week. Sludge inside the reactor was sampled and analyzed for TS and VS at least once each experimental condition from 9 sampling port on one side of the reactor and calculated the average value. TS and VS were detected according to the U.S. EPA Standard Method. The pH was measured using a pH meter (TOA-DKK) equipped with a GST-5721C probe. The samples for the analysis of VFA were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 8 min and filtered with 0.45 μm pore size filters as a pretreatment. The concentrations of VFA were detected by a gas chromatography (GC-2014, Shimadzu). The sample was acidified by adding 0.5 ml of 0.1 mol/L HCl solution to 0.5 ml filtrate, and then 0.1μL mixed solution was injected to GC for analysis. COD was measured with COD digest vials (HACH). Significant differences (P-values) between mesophilic and thermophilic treatment in methane production and COD removal were calculated using Excel 2010 (Microsoft Office, 2010).


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Reactor performance in whole experiment period


3.1.1 Biogas production

The treatment performance of methane production in two reactors is shown in Fig. 2 . At OLR of 3.0 kg-COD/m^3/d (HRT 20 d), the methane production rate was under 1 L/L/d for both reactors. The mesophilic reactor performed slightly better than the thermophilic one at methane production under this condition. This could be explained as the thermophilic bacteria need more time (over a month) to develop redox population compared with mesophilic bacteria. Since stable methane production was obtained in the reactors, the HRT was changed from 20 to 10 d from day 106. The methane production in two reactors increased to around 2 L/L/d with HRT decrease. However, after day 160, at OLR of 7.3 kg-COD/m^3/d, scum accumulated in the mesophilic reactor and caused problems with blocking and gas production reduction. After scum problem occurred, reactor cleaning was carried out. However, the accumulation of scum continued in the reactor from day 160 to 249, and the scum layer reached approximately 10 cm thick in the upper part of the reactor. This result is consistence with the results from previous study that HRT shortening can cause the scum accumulation in the anaerobic digester (Halalsheh et al., 2005; Kobayashi et al., 2013). However, in this study, scum began to appear at a much lower OLR of 7.3 kg-COD/m^3/d compared with 8.9–12.6 kg-COD/m^3/d reported by Kobayashi et al. (2013). The scum composition was analyzed, and the results showed that it contained 2.7 g/L carbohydrate, 6.0 g/L protein and 24.2 g/L lipid. In contrast, scum did not accumulate in the thermophilic reactor. The methane production increased sharply during day 160–233, which could be caused by the composition change in the FW. To avoid scum problem, the HRT of both reactor was increased from 10 to 15 d from day 250. Thus a stable methane production was observed again in the mesophilic reactor. From these results, in this study, a maximum OLR of 7.3 kg-COD/m^3/d (at HRT 15 d) was obtained for a stable operation in the mesophilic reactor treating FW. For the thermophilic FW fermentation, to continue investigate the OLR on the reactor performance, the HRT was changed step by step. The methane gas production rate increased from 1.44 to 4.19 L/L/d with HRT decreased from 15 to 5 d. The methane composition was maintained around 60% in both reactors in this experiment.


3.1.2 Organic removal

The influent and effluent COD concentrations and COD removals are shown in Fig. 3 . At HRT of 20 and influent COD around 60 g/L, the effluent COD in both reactor was maintained under 5 g/L, and COD removal was above 90%. At HRT of 10, the influent COD increased to more than 100 g/L. This could explain why the methane production rate increased sharply in this condition. However, the COD removal decreased sharply to 75.9% in the mesophilic reactor. For the thermophilic reactor, it effectively removed 87% of total COD from the FW even at HRT of 5 d. Generally, VFAs produced in the anaerobic reactor could be ultimately converted into CH_4 and CO_2 through acetogenesis and methanogenesis. However, at high organic loading, accumulated VFAs can lead to the decrease of pH and even the process failure in anaerobic digestion (Buyukkamaci and Filibeli, 2004; Palacio-Barco et al., 2010). Kumar et al. (2016) reported that VFAs were observed in both mesophilic and thermophilic CSTR reactors at OLRs of 4.6–6.1 kg-COD/m^3/d in the anaerobic FW treatment. In contrast, no VFA was detected from the effluent under stable operation of both reactors. This result suggested that the SDSAR could successfully avoid VFA accumulation which would result in the decrease of pH and even the failure of anaerobic digestion.


3.1.3 Solid removal

The influent TS and VS changed in a wide range of 20–80 g/L. However, in the thermophilic reactor, the effluent TS and VS was maintained below 10 g/L. On the other hand, the effluent TS and VS once were as high as 32.1 and 27.8 g/L at HRT 10d in the mesophilic reactor. The average TS and VS concentration inside the reactors measured and calculated are shown in Fig. 4 . At HRT of 10 d, when scum was accumulated in the mesophilic reactor, the VS in the reactor decreased from 17.5 to 11.0 g/L. This could be considered as a result of the urging floating scum brought the sludge to the upper part. This result is consistent with the increase in effluent TS and VS. In the thermophilic reactor, VS gradually increased and then stabilized at around 20 g/L.


3.2 Effect of temperature and OLR on reactor performance


3.2.1 COD recovery from output, solid distribution, pH and mixing frequency

The conversions of COD at different OLR conditions are shown in Fig. 5 . For mesophilic reactor, the proportion of COD used for methane production decreased from 91.4 to 81.8% sharply with OLR increased from 3.0 to 7.3 kg-COD/m^3/d. When OLR decreased to 4.8 kg-COD/m^3/d, this proportion increased to 86.8%. OLR did have a significant influence on the mesophilic methane fermentation in this study. However, for the thermophilic reactor, the proportion of COD utilized for methane production was maintained at about 85%. OLR changing from 3.0 to 14.4 kg-COD/m^3/d did not affect a lot in the thermophilic methane fermentation. The limits of the loading capacity of the mesophilic SDSAR were observed while the thermophilic one was able to endure the change.

The distribution of TS and VS in the thermophilic and mesophilic reactors at different OLRs is shown in Fig. 6 . Sludge inside the reactors were taken from sampling port P1–P9 as shown in Fig. 1. In the thermophilic reactor, TS changed a lot from 2.0 to 56.4 g/L. The TS concentration at P2 and P7 were much higher than those at the other ports under all the OLR conditions investigated. Both P2 and P7 located in the lower part in Chamber 1 and 3. P2 near the influent dosing port, whereas P7 located at the lowest part in the reactor. Qi et al. (2013) reported that Chamber 1 and 2 would function most likely a CSTR while Chamber 3would function more like an unmixed plug flow reactor according to their fluid analysis of the SDSAR. This could explain why the TS level in Chamber 3 was higher compared with Chamber 2. However, the high level of TS in Chamber 1 may relate to the influent dosing. With OLR changing from 3.0 to 14.4 kg-COD/m^3/d, the TS concentration increased in chambers 1 and 3, whereas no significant difference was observed in chamber 2. In the mesophilic reactor, a similar trend on the TS concentration was observed. The average TS concentration in the reactor increased from 5.8 to 17.4 g/L with the OLR increase from 3.0 to 7.3 kg-COD/m^3/d. In addition to P7, there was no great variation in TS concentration in the others parts at the same OLR condition. In both reactors, the TS were uniformly distributed in chamber 2, indicating that siphon mixing made organic and inorganic solids fully dispersed in this chamber in the reactor. The pH inside the reactor was detected at least once at each OLR condition. The results showed that in the mesophilic SDSAR, pH was kept above 7 overall the experimental period even when the scum layer appeared. However, in the thermophilic SDSAR, at OLR of 9.3 and 14.4 kg-COD/m^3/d, pH in the first chamber decreased to 6.3 and 4.9.

In this study, the pressure difference higher than 0.5 atm was considered as mixing once in the reactor. Depending on the data recorded by the digital pressure gauge, the average mixing frequencies at different OLR conditions are calculated and summarized in Table 1 . The siphon mixing frequencies increased with OLR increased from 3.0 to 7.3 kg-COD/m^3/d. The value of mixing frequencies in the thermophilic SDSAR was higher than that in the mesophilic SDSAR. It is reported that mixing could reduce scum formation and deposits formation (Monteith and Stephenson, 1981; Hamad et al., 1981). However, mixing frequencies (15.8 times per day) in the mesophilic SDSAR seems insufficient to avoid scum formation under OLR of 7.3 kg-COD/m^3/d. The siphon mixing did made the pH adjusted so that acidification can be avoid in the reactor. On the other hand, the low mixing frequencies did not significant affect the methane production. From the thermodynamic point of view, mixing should have a negative impact on degradation since increased mixing disrupts the microstructures of bacteria that rely on symbiotic relationships. However, several studies have reported a tendency that the abundance of the methanogenesis showed a significant increase at low mixing frequency (50–60 rpm) or minimal rather than high (Vavilin and Angelidaki, 2005; Hoffmann et al., 2008). This may explain why a relatively high methane production could be maintained in the SDSAR under low mixing frequency.


3.2.2 COD removal and methane production

The COD removal and methane production variations at different OLR conditions are shown in Fig. 7 . The methane production rate increased with OLR increasing in both reactors. In the thermophilic reactor, the methane production rate linearly increased from 0.85 to 4.19 L/L/d while OLR increased from 3.0 to 14.7 kg-COD/m^3/d. In the mesophilic reactor, the methane production rate also increased from 0.97 to 2.08 L/L/d with OLR increased from 3.0 to 7.3 kg-COD/m^3/d. No significant difference (P > 0.05) in methane production was observed between mesophilic and thermophilic reactor at different OLR conditions. However, the COD removal was significantly different (P < 0.05) in the two reactors. In the mesophilic reactor, the COD removal decreased significantly from 92.3 to 75.9% with OLR increasing. In contrast, the COD removal could be maintained above 85% even if the OLR increased from 3.0 to 14.4 kg-COD/m^3/d in the thermophilic reactor. It was confirmed that the thermophilic reactor can be adapt to a wide range of OLR (3.0–14.4 kg-COD/m^3/d) in anaerobic FW treatment. These results indicated that thermophilic anaerobic reactors allow higher loading rate and yield higher methane production, substrate degradation and pathogen destruction. Also, the higher temperature shortens the required retention time because it speeds up the reaction of degradation of the organic material. In fact, mesophilic reactors operate with robust microbial consortia that tolerate greater changes in the environment and are more stable and easier to maintain. The disadvantages of mesophilic reactors are longer retention time and lower biogas production.

In the literature, the methane yields (MYs) from FW were within 337–450 ml/g-VS at a long HRT more than 20 days, and 337–374 ml/g-VS at a short HRT less than 20 days (Nagao et al., 2012; Zhang and Jahng, 2012). Recently, Kumar et al. (2016) reported a MY of 264 ml/g-VS at thermophilic condition treating FW with CSTR, while Park et al. (2017) narrated that a MY of 374 ml/g-VS was obtained at mesophilic condition treating FW with UASB reactor. In this study, the average MYs were 412 and 423 ml/g-VS at HRT 15 and 10 d in the mesophilic reactor. In the thermophilic reactor, the average MYs were 403, 462, 437 and 442 ml/g-VS at HRT of 15, 10, 7.5, 5 d, respectively. Those MYs are much higher than the reported values which indicated that the SDSAR had a better performance on methane production for FW treatment compared with other anaerobic reactors. On the other hand, some researchers reported that the MY under thermophilic condition was much higher than that under mesophilic condition (Kumar et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2017), presumably because FW could be thoroughly degraded under thermophilic condition. In this study, there was no much difference for the MY under mesophilic and thermophilic conditions. This is probably because FW was thoroughly degrader in both mesophilic and thermophilic SDSARs under relatively low OLR conditions. These experimental results demonstrate the validity of the performance of the SDSAR, and verify that the on-site SDSAR treatment could produce a sufficient amount of methane gas from the FW.

The reactor performance with the different OLR conditions investigated is summarized in Table 2 . It is clear that the thermophilic SDSAR had a higher stability and a wider suitable OLR range compared with the mesophilic SDSAR in treating disposed FW. In the United States, nearly all digesters are mesophilic in use at WWTPs and farms. In Europe, dedicated FW digesters tend to use high solids (dry) technology and operate in the thermophilic range (Moriarty, 2013). Our results suggest that SDSAR could be a technology choice for the on-site FD treatment, and thermophilic system was considerably better than that of the mesophilic reactor.


4 Conclusions

The effects of OLR and operating temperature on the performance of SDSARs for the food waste treatment were investigated. It is observed that with HRT above 15 d and OLR below 4.8 kg-COD/m^3/d, relatively high COD removal in the range of 84.5–92.3% was obtained in both reactors. It is suggested that the SDSAR could successfully avoid VFA accumulation compared with other anaerobic digesters. However, the limits of the loading capacity of the mesophilic SDSAR were observed when OLR was further increased to 7.3 kg-COD/m^3/d by shortening HRT. In contrast, the thermophilic reactor can be operated at OLR as high as 14.4 kg-COD/m^3/d with satisfactory COD removal and biogas production. Based on the results, it is suggested that thermophilic SDSAR is a promising technology for the on-site FW treatment. The feasibility of mesophilic SDSAR would need to be further studied.