TITLE: Biomethane production using fresh and thermally pretreated Chlorella vulgaris biomass: A comparison of batch and semi-continuous feeding mode


1 Introduction

Photosynthetic microorganisms, such as microalgae, are nowadays studied as potential feedstock for next generation biofuels as an alternative to fossil fuels. Even though the upstream benefits of cultivating microalgae are clear (wastewater bioremediation, carbon dioxide mitigation and nutrients recovery, Ji et al., 2013), the problem encountered nowadays are related to the downstream biomass processing. Among biofuel production processes using this kind of biomass, biogas generation seems to be the least complex since all the organic macromolecules (proteins, carbohydrates and lipids) are used. Microalgae cell-wall provides resistance to bacterial degradation and thereby hinders or inhibits hydrolytic phase of the anaerobic digestion process (Mendez et al., 2013). The main challenge is the optimization of pretreatments intended for cell-wall disruption prior to anaerobic digestion (Mendez et al., 2013; González-Fernández et al., 2012; Cho et al., 2013). However, pretreatments can lead to by-products, such as those generated during the reactions of proteins and carbohydrates degradation (Mendez et al., 2013; Monlau et al., 2014) that can also reduce the methane yield. Previous studies have reported the use of several pretreatments, such as heat application on biomass, for an enhanced methane production in batch tests (Mendez et al., 2013; Passos and Ferrer, 2015; Mendez et al., 2014a). Data obtained in batch assays can provide guidance, but assessing the benefits of pretreatments in semicontinuously fed reactors (continuous stirred tank reactors, CSTR) is highly required in order to study in-depth the performance of anaerobic microorganisms fed with pretreated microalgae biomass. As a matter of fact, only few investigations have moved forward to CSTR (Passos and Ferrer, 2015; Schwede et al., 2013; González-Fernández et al., 2013). The performance of CSTRs fed with microalgae is still very limited and required to further confirm the beneficial effect of pretreatments. In this context, thermal pretreatment applied to Chlorella vulgaris has been shown beneficial in batch mode anaerobic digestions (Mendez et al., 2013, 2014a) by solubilizing polymeric cell structures (Mendez et al., 2014b), but confirming these in CSTR digestion mode is required. The aim of the present study was to compare the performance of two CSTRs digesting raw and thermally pretreated C. vulgaris in terms of methane production, organic matter degradation, nitrogen mineralization and potential inhibitors.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Microorganisms

The selected microalga, namely C. vulgaris, was grown in a lab-scale photobioreactor under continuous artificial light (fluorescent, 6000 luxes) and agitation supplied by air bubbling. This microalga was selected as model microorganisms due to its easiness to cultivate outdoors and its robustness (hard cell wall). This biomass was cultivated on Modified Bold Basal Medium (Mendez et al., 2014a). Culture broth was periodically collected and microalgae were concentrated by centrifugation (Heraeus Thermo Scientific) at 5000 rpm for 10 min. Chemical characterization of the microalgae used as substrates can be seen in Table 1 . On the other hand, the anaerobic sludge employed as inoculum for the CSTRs was collected at the wastewater treatment plant of Valladolid (Spain). Anaerobic biomass presented a total solids (TS) concentration of 21.1 g L^−1 and volatile solids (VS)/TS of around 60%.

Microalgae batches were diluted to a standard concentration of 65 g TS L^−1 prior to thermal pretreatment (Mendez et al., 2014a). Thermal pretreatment was carried out by autoclaving the biomass at 120 °C for 40 min (Mendez et al., 2014a).


2.2 Semi-continuous CSTRs

Anaerobic digestion was conducted in two CSTRs with a total volume of 1.5 L (1 L liquid volume and 0.5 L headspace volume). The reactors worked under mesophilic conditions (35 °C) using a water jacket connected to a water bath. Constant mixing of the digesters was accomplished with magnetic stirrers at 250 rpm. Biogas production was measured by water displacement. Methane content was analyzed by gas chromatography. Reactors were operated on semicontinuous mode, i.e. the same volume was withdrawn and fed in a daily basis using plastic syringes. To verify the enhancement of biogas production after pretreatment, one reactor was fed with raw C. vulgaris biomass (not-treated) and the other one was fed with thermally pretreated biomass. The organic loading rate (OLR) was set at 1.5 g COD L^−1 day^−1 for both reactors. Previous studies performed in batch mode showed that methane productivity was almost negligible after 15 days of digestion (Passos and Ferrer, 2015; González-Fernández et al., 2013), thus a hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 15 days was selected for the present study. After three HRT, the system was considered at steady state.


2.3 Analytic procedures

Total solids (TS), volatile solids (VS) and total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) were measured according to Standard Methods (Eaton et al., 2005). Proteins were calculated by multiplying TKN results by 5.95 (González López et al., 2010). Carbohydrates content was measured by phenol-sulphuric acid method (DuBois et al., 1965). Colorimetric methods were used for COD (Merck, ISO 15705) and ammonium (Merck, ISO 7150-1) determination. Soluble fractions were obtained after centrifugation at 14,600 rpm for 5 min (Mini-spin Eppendorf 5424).

Biogas composition was measured by gas chromatography (Agilent 7820A) equipped with 19095P-Q04 30 m column (HP-PLOT Q) connected to a flame ionization detector and thermal conductivity detector at 250 °C and H_2 at 4.5 mL min^−1 as carrier gas. Volatile fatty acids (VFAs) were analyzed in soluble phase by high-performance liquid chromatography in an Agilent 1260 chromatograph equipped with Aminex HPX-87H column and UV–vis detector.


3 Results and discussion


3.1 C. vulgaris  used as a substrate: characterization and hydrolysis after thermal pretreatment

The characterization of fresh and thermally pretreated biomass is shown in Table 1. 92% of the TS were represented by VS and hence only 8% of the dry matter was inorganic material (ash). The freshness of the biomass can be observed by the low soluble COD in the non-pretreated biomass with regard to the total COD. The total COD/VS ratio ranged 1.70–1.88 for both biomass. This value is in good agreement with other microalgae biomass characterized previously (González-Fernández et al., 2013; Ramos-Suárez and Carreras, 2014). The total COD/TKN ratio was approximately 15. This value can change depending on the protein content of the microalgae which at the same time depends on microalgae growth conditions. Microalgae grown in wastewater or synthetic media provided similar values (Mendez et al., 2013; Passos and Ferrer, 2015), and therefore this value was considered to be in the conventional range. As a matter of fact, microalgae biomass composition studied herein exhibited 64.2 ± 3.4% w/w TS of proteins and 20.1 ± 3.2% w/w TS of carbohydrates. Taking these values into consideration together with the ash content, the remaining lipid fraction was estimated to be around 10%. This macromolecular profile is quite similar to other reported microalgae biomasses grown in non-stressed conditions (Mendez et al., 2013, 2014a).

In view of the promising results obtained by Mendez et al. (2013) in terms of organic matter solubilization and methane yield, C. vulgaris biomass was pretreated thermally at 120 °C for 40 min. With regard to that of raw biomass, thermal pretreatment of C. vulgaris led to an increase in the soluble phase of 4.5-fold for carbohydrates and 1.9-fold for proteins (Mendez et al., 2013). This solubilization of complex macromolecules was attributed to the cell-wall disruption taking place during thermal pretreatment. In the present study, the hydrolysis efficiency resulted in an enhancement of soluble COD of 10-fold. This value is similar to previous reports where 6-fold enhancement was registered when treating a mixture of 70% Chlorella sp. and Scenedesmus sp. at 120 °C for 30 min (Cho et al., 2013). Thus, the effectiveness of the thermal pretreatment was proven.


3.2 CSTRs semi-continuous anaerobic digestion


3.2.1 Organic matter fate

In order to investigate the digestion of C. vulgaris biomass in semicontinuous mode, two CSTRs were run in parallel (not treated and thermally treated biomass). Methane yield measured in the CSTR fed with raw C. vulgaris ranged 85 ± 15 mL CH_4 g COD in.^−1 while the total COD and VS removal averaged 36.5 ± 6.0% and 31.9 ± 4.0%, respectively (Fig. 1 ). The values of soluble COD removed after anaerobic digestion were negligible due to the low quantity of organic matter present in the soluble phase of the untreated biomass. As soon as the hydrolytic bacteria were solubilizing the organic matter, it was used and converted to methane and thus, no soluble COD was measured. Note worth to mention that these values were markedly lower than the values attained in batch anaerobic digestion (138 mL CH_4 g COD in.^−1, Mendez et al., 2013). However, when compared to other studies conducted in CSTR mode, these results are in accordance with the study of Ras et al. (2011) dealing with the anaerobic digestion of raw C. vulgaris. In that study, total COD removal of 33% was achieved under HRT 16 days and OLR of 1 g COD day^−1 L^−1.

It has been previously shown that anaerobic digestion in batch mode of thermally pretreated C. vulgaris could lead to 1.93-fold methane yield enhancement with regard to that obtained from raw biomass (Mendez et al., 2013). This improvement was attributed to the cell-wall disruption and organic matter solubilization. When the CSTR was fed with the thermally pretreated biomass at the same OLR, 1.5-fold methane yield enhancement was reached in comparison with the CSTR fed with untreated biomass. The methane yield of this CSTR achieved 126 ± 25 mL CH_4 g COD in.^−1. The methane content of the biogas was around 72%. In this CSTR, total COD and VS removal was enhanced to 49.7 ± 3.8 and 41.5 ± 3.5, respectively. These values were in agreement with other investigations dealing with similar microalgal biomass (Passos and Ferrer, 2015). Similarly to the CSTR fed with raw biomass, the CSTR fed with thermally treated biomass also provided lower methane yield that previously found in batch mode digestion. More specifically, in batch mode, thermal pretreatment enhanced methane yield by 1.93-fold while in semicontinuous operated reactors this value decreased to 1.5-fold. Overall, methane yield decreased 2-fold when results from batch digestion were compared to data obtained in CSTR. Passos and Ferrer (2015) determined a methane yield enhancement of 1.42-fold when digesting Oocystis sp. in CSTR operated at OLR of 2.5 g tCOD l^−1 day^−1 and HRT of 20 days. These results were fairly comparable to the values attained for the batch mode digestion. Nevertheless, other studies have also shown a decrease on methane yield when evaluating thermal pretreatment of microalgae in CSTRs. González-Fernández et al. (2013) reported methane yield of 33 mL CH_4 g COD in.^−1 and 97 mL CH_4 g COD in.^−1 with untreated and thermally pretreated Scenedesmus sp. respectively, when working at OLR 1 g tCOD l^−1 day^−1 and HRT 15 days. However, when methane yield attained in batch mode was compared with the value obtained in CSTR, methane yield also decreased 1.54-fold. In the same line, Schwede et al. (2013) also observed a 2-fold decrease in methane yield when comparing the digestion of Nannochloropsis salina in batch and semicontinuous mode. In this sense, the scarce information available comparing digestion modes seem to merge to the conclusion of lower methane yield obtained in semicontinuous mode when compared to batch mode. Imbalances in the microbial population may lead to diminished methane yields since their optimal interaction is crucial for the maintenance of biogas production (Talbot et al., 2008). In order to elucidate the reasons for the differences observed in the different digestion modes, the interrelations between microbial ecology and the performance of anaerobic digesters are highly required. Up to now there is no significant information concerning microbial population (Bacteria and Archaea) of digesters fed with this biomass. The main reason for that is related to the inappropriate separation of nucleic acids of eukaryotic and prokaryotic microorganisms and thus, DNA co-amplification may preclude the analysis (Bakke et al., 2011).

Regarding the soluble organic matter, 92.4 ± 2.3% soluble COD removal was observed in the effluent of the CSTR fed with the pretreated biomass. Thereby, organic matter solubilization taking place during the pretreatment plays an important role on methane production since it is readily available for anaerobic bacteria. In order to identify if this soluble organic matter corresponded to intermediate products, VFAs were also measured in the CSTRs effluents. However, no VFAs accumulation was observed. Both CSTRs exhibited a soluble COD of approximately 200 mg L^−1, indicating that this soluble organic matter remaining in the effluent was recalcitrant to anaerobic digestion.


3.2.2 Nitrogen fate

An efficient conversion of organic matter into biogas entails as well a high nitrogen mineralization. During anaerobic digestion, the proteins of the substrate get degraded into ammonium. Taking into consideration the biomass protein content, the initial biomass used as substrate and the final ammonium concentration determined in the effluents of the anaerobic digesters, the organic nitrogen converted to ammonium (nitrogen mineralization) can be observed in Fig. 2 . In the present study, nitrogen mineralization ranged 52.4 ± 9.4% for the raw C. vulgaris biomass. This percentage is higher than the one reported by Ras et al. (2011). In this later study, the anaerobic digestion of raw C. vulgaris in a CSTR operated at HRT of 16 days resulted in 19% nitrogen mineralization while when operated at 28 days HRT, this value increased to 69%. In comparison, the CSTR fed with thermally pretreated biomass exhibited 78.1 ± 5.5% nitrogen mineralization. Similarly to the trend observed for COD degradation, thermally pretreated biomass improved organic nitrogen degradation. Even though the ammonium concentration in the inlet of the reactor was not increased by the thermal treatment (Table 1), the pretreatment facilitated nitrogen mineralization. It is important to highlight this feature since a high nitrogen mineralization mediates a high ammonium concentration in the digestate which ultimately can be used again to grow microalgae.

Given the high nitrogen mineralization, special care should be given to the ammonium concentration in the reactors. As a result of the proteins breakdown, ammonium accumulation can inhibit the anaerobic digestion. Both forms ammonium and ammonia, have been reported powerful methanogens inhibitors. Particularly, free ammonia can inhibit the process at low concentrations ranging 150 mg L^−1 (McCarty and McKinney, 1961). The dissociation of ammonium into ammonia is highly affected by the pH and temperature. The effluent ammonium concentration ranged 828.8 ± 48.1 mg L^−1 and 1141.1 ± 66.3 mg L^−1 for the CSTRs fed with raw and pretreated biomass, respectively (Fig. 2). The pH measured in the outlets of the CSTRs averaged 7.2 ± 0.1. Given the acidification constant and the temperature at which the reactors were operated (35 °C), the ammonia concentration can be calculated. The obtained values were 13.3 ± 2.1 mg L^−1 for the reactor fed with fresh microalgae and 23.2 ± 4.8 mg L^−1 for the reactor fed with the thermally pretreated biomass. Therefore, no ammonia inhibition was detected. Despite the high protein content of the biomass used as substrate and the high nitrogen mineralization, the constant pH measured throughout the digestion helped avoiding ammonia inhibition. Similar results were observed previously in other studies working on batch assays and CSTRs (González-Fernández et al., 2013; Ras et al., 2011). Overall, the follow up of common anaerobes inhibitors did not provide any evidence. One strategy can be the follow up of known inhibitors but when unknown, another useful approach is the analysis of the anaerobic microbiome. It is thus highlighted the need to further investigate microbial communities developed in digesters fed with microalgae and potential adaptation strategies to by-products coming along with this substrate.


4 Conclusion

Digester fed with thermally pretreated C. vulgaris increased 1.5-fold methane production compared with the CSTR fed with fresh biomass (84 mL CH_4 g COD in.^−1). Nitrogen mineralization averaged 52 and 78% for raw and thermally treated C. vulgaris, respectively. Despite the high nitrogen mineralization registered, no ammonium/ammonia inhibition was detected. Overall, methane production yield was enhanced in CSTRs after thermally pretreating the microalgae biomass; nevertheless, the values attained were comparably lower than the obtained in batch mode digestion. This study highlighted the need of further testing promising pretreatments in semicontinuous mode before claiming their effectiveness. Likewise, the need of studying microbial populations developed in these digesters was highlighted to enable the use of microbial indicators that could help the optimal performance of digesters.