TITLE: Effects of the reactor volumetric ratio and recycle ratio on the methane and energy productivity of a three-step anaerobic sequencing batch reactor (3S-ASBR) treating ethanol wastewater


1 Introduction

Both CH_4 and H_2 are promising alternative fuels because they have high combustion energy contents and can be produced from organic waste materials. CH_4 with a high calorific value of 801 kJ/mol (50 MJ/kg) is higher, as compared with 46 and 45 MJ/kg for gasoline and diesel, respectively and it contains a higher hydrogen to carbon ratio, resulting in a lower CO_2 emission level than other hydrocarbon fuels [1,2]. H_2 gives a calorific value of 242 kJ/mol, approximately 2.75-fold higher than those of hydrocarbon (HC) fuels, and it produces only water as a combustion product [1,3,4].

Biogas production technology through anaerobic digestion has been successfully employed in several industries, such as food, cassava flour, ethanol, and palm oil. It offers the two advantages of a lower treatment expense and the generation of valuable biogas. Anaerobic digestion is a microbiological process to alter biological matters in the deficiency of dissolved oxygen to yield hydrogen (H_2), methane (CH_4), and carbon dioxide (CO_2) via the four serial stages of hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis, and methanogenesis [5,6].

One of the limitations of single step anaerobic digestion for real application is its very slow bio-reaction rate, causing to have a very high investment for any biogas plant. To overcome this constraint, new anaerobic digestion processes have been progressively developed to generate biogas more efficiently in both quality and quantity [1,7–13]. One of the most exciting advancements is the development of multi-step anaerobic processes. The concept relies on an arrangement of bioreactors’ volumes to match the growth rates of the main four sequential steps of hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis and methanogenesis [14].

An anaerobic sequencing batch reactor (ASBR) has several advantages, such as the ease of control, higher flexibility in operation, ability to handle wastewater with a large content of suspended solids and a relatively low investment cost [15–17]. Moreover, it does not require a separate clarifier and delivers homogeneous mixing with a high microbial content in the whole system, causing a high optimum COD loading rate, compared to other anaerobic digestion processes. As a consequence, a larger COD loading rate can be operated in an ASBR system than other anaerobic digestion systems [18].

Recently, a three-stage upflow anaerobic sludge blanket (3S-UASB) system treating cassava wastewater, for the first time of its kind, was reported to offer very high process productivity with a greater chemical oxygen demand (COD) reduction of up to 92.5%, a higher COD loading rate (15 kg/m^3d), and larger biogas production yield, compared to those of single-stage and two-stage anaerobic systems treating the same wastewater [13]. For the 3S-ASBR operated at a high COD loading rate of 18 kg/m^3d, the maximum process productivity was attained at a reactor volumetric ratio of 5 L: 5 L: 20 L (or 1:1:5) for the first: the second: the third reactors [19]. The basic concept of these 3S-ASBR systems reportedly relied on the availability of the proper pH values of 5.5, 6.5, and 7–8 in the R1, R2, and R3 for acidogens, acetogens, and methanogens, respectively, [12].

The 3-step anaerobic system with a very high process productivity has been first developed by our research group, as mentioned above, but the important factors for process improvement including reactor volumetric ratio and recycle ratio have not been yet studied. Therefore, the purpose of this investigation was to examine the effects of reactor volumetric ratio and recycle ratio (the final effluent flow rate to the feed flow rate) on the methanogenic activity of a 3S- ASBR system treating ethanol wastewater at a fixed COD loading rate of 10 kg/m^3d and 37 °C. A moderate COD loading rate of 10 kg/m^3d was selected in this study to avoid the overload situation, particularly in the R1, in which the optimum volumetric ratio obtained from the present investigation would be different from that obtained in a previous study operated at a high COD loading rate of 18 kg/m^3d [19]. The 3S-ASBR was operated in a continuous feed mode under a steady state condition and so the mixed culture could be fully adapted to the ethanol wastewater under the various studied conditions, leading to a high reliability in the experimental results. In contrast, most other research works have been conducted under a batch operation procedure with an unsteady state situation, causing differences and variations in the microbial activity and microbial concentration, respectively, and so the resultant data cannot be extended to a full-scale application. The new findings obtained from the current investigation will be very useful for further development of a three-step anaerobic system (ASBR or UASB) towards a full-scale application in the near future.


2 Methodology


2.1 Seed sludge

The sludge sample, collected from a UASB unit handling ethanol wastewater (Sapthip Company in Lopburi province, Thailand), was sifted to eliminate solid particles of >1 mm diameter and then allowed to settle to concentrate the screened sludge. The concentrated sludge sample was then pretreated at 95 °C for about 15 min to destroy H_2-consuming or CH_4-producing microbes and to enrich the H_2-generating bacteria [20]. The thermal-treated sludge was added to R1, while the untreated sludge was added to R2 and R3. Tap water made up the full liquid holding volumes of R1, R2, and R3. A certain quantity of the seed sludge was introduced in each reactor to achieve an initial content of microbial cells, in terms of a mixed liquor volatile suspended solids (MLVSS) value of around 5700 mg/L.


2.2 Ethanol wastewater

The ethanol wastewater, discharged from the distillation columns, was sifted through a 1-mm strainer to eliminate the outsized solid particles of unconverted cassava root and preserved in a refrigerator at around 4 °C until use. Table 1 illustrates the chemical composition of the studied ethanol wastewater. The COD: Nitrogen (N): Phosphorous (P) proportion of 100:1.6:0.7 indicated that the studied wastewater possessed adequate quantities of both basic nutrients (N and P) for anaerobic decomposition, as compared to the theoretical ratio of 100:1:0.4 for anaerobic digestion [21]. Hence, the ethanol wastewater was fed into the 3S-ASBR unit without any nutrient addition [21,22].


2.3 The 3S-ASBR setup and operation

Fig. 1 depicts the schematic presentation of the 3S-ASBR unit used in the current study, which was comprised of three sequential reactors (R1, R2, and R3) joined in series. The reactors were made of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe and plate to avoid the photosynthetic activities by bacteria and algae. The all three reactors were controlled at 37 °C using a temperature controlling unit coupled with a heating rod for each reactor. The pH values in R2 and R3 were not controlled, but R1 was regulated at pH 5.5, as this is reported to be the optimum pH for H_2-producing bacteria [23], by means of a pH controller (Extech, 48PH2) with a small dosing pump for adding a 1 M sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution into R1. The overflow of R3 was fed back into R1 to reduce the required amount of added NaOH in R1 for pH regulation and also to elevate the alkalinity levels in all reactors so as to help increase the stability and performance of the overall system.

The operation of the 3S-ASBR was consisted of four serial steps of adding (10 min), reacting (70 min), settling (90 min), and discharging (10 min), which were achieved using a programmable logic controller (PLC) with a level probe to regulate the high precision peristaltic pump (Longer Pump, BT100-2J, China) for both the time of each step and the amount of feed for each reactor. For the adding step, both the ethanol wastewater and the recycled effluent from R3 were pumped to R1 by means of two separate peristaltic pumps, while the effluent from R1 was fed to R2 and the effluent from R2 was then introduced to R3 during the discharging step. For the reacting step, a magnetic stirrer (400 rpm) was switched on to attain uniform mixing in each reactor. For the settling step, the magnetic stirrer was turned off to permit sedimentation of the microbial sludge in each reactor. For the discharging step, the settled liquid in each reactor was removed by the respective peristaltic pump equipped with a level probe to control the quantity of the settled discharge to the next reactor. The 3S-ASBR unit was operated with 8 cycles per day and it was run around four weeks to attain a steady state condition for each specified condition. The steady state condition was justified when both the gas production rate and the effluent COD value were relatively constant with time (less than 5% of standard deviation). After that, the generated gas, sludge and effluent samples of all three reactors were taken for analyses and measurements once a day for a least 5 consecutive days.

In this study, the two process parameters of the reactor volumetric ratio and the recycle ratio (the final effluent flow rate to the feed flow rate) were varied to heighten the CH_4 productivity of the 3S-ASBR unit. For the first part, the total liquid holding volume of all three reactors was retained at 30 L with a fixed recycle ratio of 1:1, while the volumetric ratio was varied at 6 L:6 L:18 L, 5 L:5 L:20 L, 4 L:8 L:18 L, and 4 L:6 L:20 L, corresponding to 1:1:3, 1:1:4, 1:2:4.5, and 1:1.5:5, respectively, to find the optimal volumetric ratio for the highest process efficiency, in terms of the highest CH_4 productivity and the greatest energy extraction. For the second part, the recycle ratio was varied at 0.5:1, 1:1, and 2:1 at a fixed optimum reactor volumetric ratio of 1:1.5:5 (obtained from the first part above) to find an optimum recycle ratio for the highest process productivity. The experiments were conducted at a constant COD loading rate of 10 kg/m^3d (based on the overall liquid volume of the system).


2.4 Measuring and analytical procedures

The gas evolution rate in each reactor was quantified by a wet test meter (Ritter, TGO5/5, Germany) at ambient conditions (∼30 °C and 1 atm). The generated gas was daily collected using a GC syringe (Hamilton) and immediately injected to gas chromatography (GC) for chemical composition analysis. The major gases (CH_4, CO_2, and H_2) were determined by a PerkinElmer GC unit (AutoSystem, USA) with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) and two packed columns (HayeSep D 100/120 mesh and Molecular sieve, Altech) in series. Argon was employed as the carrier gas. The temperatures of 150, 60 and 200 °C were fixed for the injector, column, and detector, respectively. The trace hydrogen sulfide (H_2S) gas was analyzed by a Shimadzu GC (GC-2014, Japan) equipped with a flame photometric detector (FPD) and capillary column (Agilent, DB-1). The temperatures were kept constant at 100, 80, and 250 °C for the injector, columns, and detector, respectively.

For each studied condition under the steady state situation, the samples in all reactors were obtained in the reacting period to roughly quantify the microbial concentrations, in terms of the MLVSS, and during the discharging period, the effluent of each reactor was taken for determination of the microbial washout as the value of volatile suspended solids (VSS). The analyses of MLVSS and VSS were performed following standard methods [24].

The samples of the feed and effluents of all three reactors were reserved for the determination of COD, total VFAs, VFA constitution, total alkalinity, pH, nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), sulfide, sulfate, calorific value, and micronutrients (as divalent metal cations). The total VFA concentration and composition were determined by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC; Shimadzu, LC-20A, Japan) using a refractive index detector (RID; Shimadzu, RID-20A) and an Aminex HPX-87H column (Bio-Rad Laboratories). The column temperature was adjusted to 60 °C, and 5 mM sulfuric acid solution was employed as the mobile phase at a stable flow rate of 0.6 mL/min. The COD value was quantified by the dichromate oxidation technique using a COD digester (HACH, DRB 200, USA) and a spectrophotometer (HACH, DR3800, USA), as described in standard methods [24].

The total nitrogen (N), NH_4 ^+-N, NO_3 ^−-N, and NO_2 ^−-N contents were quantified by persulfate digestion, salicylate, cadmium reduction, and diazolization procedures, respectively. The total P concentration was obtained by the molybdovanadate/acid persulfate digestion technique. The sulfate and soluble sulfide concentrations were quantified by the turbidimetric and methylene blue methods, respectively. The total alkalinity was determined by direct titration with a standard solution of 0.020 N H_2SO_4. The quantities of micronutrients (Fe, Cu, Ni, Co, Zn, Mn, and Mo) and Na were attained by atomic absorption spectrophotometry (AAS; SpectrAA 300, Varian).

The dried samples from the ethanol wastewater feed and effluents from all three reactors were taken for the measurement of their calorific values using a bomb calorimeter (Leco, AC-500, USA), maintaining the combustion temperature at 950 °C. The energy contents of the evaporated VFAs fractions from all dried feed and effluent samples were also considered and they were calculated by multiplying the amounts of all VFAs and EtOH with their values of heat of combustion. The heat of combustion values of HLa, HAc, HPr, HBu, HVa, and EtOH were 1344, 874, 1528, 2184, 2,838, and 1367 kJ/mol, respectively [25–29]. The energy of the generated biogas was calculated by multiplying the amount of produced H_2 and CH_4 with their calorific values of 242 kJ/mol H_2 and 801 kJ/mol CH_4, whereas it was zero for CO_2 [1]. A mole of gas was calculated at ambient conditions (∼30 °C and 1 atm). Hence, the energy extraction efficiency was calculated from the following equation: FORMULA: E n e r g y e x t r a c t i o n e f f i c i e n c y ( % ) = 100 × E n e r g y i n t h e p r o d u c e d g a s p e r d a y , k J / d E n e r g y i n t h e i n f l u e n t p e r d a y − E n e r g y i n t h e e f f l u e n t p e r d a y , k J / d

The obtained experimental data are presented as the average ± standard deviation (SD), and the calculation of all process parameters was performed as previously reported [12,13,30].


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Effects of the reactor volumetric ratio on the process productivity

Fig. 2 displays the impact of the reactor volumetric ratio on the process productivity of the studied 3S-ASBR unit operated at a constant volumetric organic loading rate of 10 kg COD/m^3d, 37 °C, fixed overall liquid volume of 30 L and 8 cycles/d. Both the total COD reduction and total gas evolution rate profiles were high in the range of 85–90% and 92–176 L/d, respectively, for all the studied reactor volumetric ratios (Fig. 2a). The impact of the reactor volumetric ratio on the overall gas production rate was superior to the overall COD reduction. The effluent recycle returned some organic matters to R1, causing the reduced effect of the reactor volumetric ratio on the COD reduction compared to the gas generation rate.

The optimum reactor volumetric ratio, in terms of the highest level of both the total COD reduction (90%) and total gas evolution rate (176 L/d), was 1:1.5:5 (4 L:6 L:20 L). These results can be explained as the three key steps of anaerobic degradation (hydrolysis with acidogenesis, acetogenesis, and methanogenesis) have different growth rates and optimal pH values [14]. A reactor volumetric ratio of 1:1.5:5 could deliver the appropriate system pH and hydraulic retention times (HRTs) to match those three key steps, causing a dominance of the hydrolysis/acidogenesis, acetogenesis, and methanogenesis in R1, R2, and R3, respectively. This then yielded the highest process productivity, as indicated by the largest values of both the total COD reduction and the overall gas generation rate. For any studied reactor volumetric ratio, the largest COD reduction appeared in R1, whereas the lowest COD reduction appeared in R2, except at a volumetric ratio of 1:1:3 (6 L:6 L:18 L), where the marginally lowest COD reduction was in R3. The highest COD reduction in R1 resulted from the recycle effect. The profile of the gas production rate of each reactor showed an inverse shape to that of the COD reduction, with the ranked order of the gas production rate as R3 > R2 > R1 for all assayed reactor volumetric ratios, and with a small difference at a reactor volumetric ratio of 1:2:4.5 (4 L:8 L:18 L).

Fig. 2b shows the impact of the reactor volumetric ratio on the composition of the created gases in all three reactors. At all studied reactor volumetric ratios, H_2 was only produced in R1 and at extremely low concentrations (0.70–0.76%), even though the pH values in R1 were very close to the preferred pH value (5.5) for H_2-producing bacteria. This is in contrast to a former investigation using the same 3S-ASBR unit, where H_2 production in R1 was up to 45% under the respective optimum COD loading rate [31]. The explanation is that the 3S-ASBR in the current work was continually operated over a few years after the first year used in the previous study, causing a high concentration of methanogens to accumulate in R1 from the sludge washed out from R3 and introduced into R1. Therefore, the H_2 generated in R1 was mostly utilized by the methanogens retained in R1 in this current investigation. For maximal H_2 production, the 3S-ASBR system has to be free from methanogens and operated at a very high COD loading rate in order to create the low solution pH (around 5.5) with a short HRT to favor to the acidogenic step and suppress the methanogenic activity in R1. Nevertheless, the presence of the methanogenic sludge in the recycled effluent from R3 to R1 was hypothesized to maximize the CH_4 productivity in the current study. The CH_4 content in the produced gas was increased in subsequent reactors of the 3S-ASBR unit (14–24%, 45–57%, and 62–81% in R1, R2, and R3, respectively), suggesting that the sequence of the three key steps of hydrolysis/acidogenesis, acetogenesis, and methanogenesis became increasingly more predominant in R1, R2, and R3, respectively. Interestingly, the maximum CH_4 content in R3 approached 81% at the optimum reactor volumetric ratio of 1:1.5:5 (4 L:6 L:20 L), consistent with the previous investigation of both 3S-ASBR and 3S-UASB systems that delivered CH_4 contents of over 80% in the R3 [13,19].

The present results indicate that the use of a three-step anaerobic system to replace a single or two-step system can significantly increase the CH_4 level in the produced biogas, which is usually only around 60% in the biogas generated in industry [6,12,32].

Inversely to the CH_4 concentration profile in the produced gas, the H_2S concentration steadily declined in the sequential reactors (90–140, 27–60 and 13–20 mg/L in R1, R2, and R3, respectively) due to the lower availability of sulfur-containing compounds in the subsequent reactors and the increased solution pH (Fig. 2c). Note that H_2S is an acidic gas and can partially solubilize in the aqueous phase as the hydrogen sulfide (HS^−) and sulfide (S^2−) ions. A higher pH leads to a higher solubility of H_2S, causing a lower amount of H_2S in the produced biogas. Theoretically, the produced H_2S is entirely in the gas phase at a pH of under 5, but is totally dissolved as HS^− and/or S^2− at pH 10, and is equally present in both the gas and aqueous phases at pH around 7 [33]. The presence of H_2S in water soluble forms (HS^− and S^2−) can chemically precipitate the divalent cations (micronutrients) present in the biogas production unit, causing a deficit of some micronutrients [34]. Therefore, any technique to prevent metal sulfide precipitation or micronutrient supplementation can directly improve the methanogenic productivity in anaerobic digestion [12].

The low pH levels in the 3S-ASBR of this study, especially the pH of around 5.5 in R1, was responsible for the lower H_2S level in the aqueous phase and so a reduced precipitation of metal sulfides and micronutrient deficiency, as further discussed later.

Fig. 2c shows the total alkalinity and pH value profiles in all three reactors at different reactor volumetric ratios, which correlated well to the process stability and biogas productivity. The total alkalinity is referred to as the buffer capacity to resist the pH drop by produced organic acids (total VFAs) in anaerobic digestion. The buffer capacity is commonly contributed from ammonium carbonate formed in anaerobic digesters [35]. At any reactor volumetric ratio, both the total alkalinity and pH values were augmented progressively through the sequential reactors (4000–4800 mg/L as CaCO_3 and a controlled pH of 5.5 in R1, 5500–6800 mg/L as CaCO_3 and pH of 6.07–6.21 in R2, and 6500–7700 mg/L as CaCO_3 and pH of 7.50–7.67 in R3). The optimum reactor volumetric ratio of 1:1.5:5 (4 L:6 L:20 L) delivered the highest total alkalinity and solution pH in each reactor compared to the other reactor volumetric ratios. The high solution pH and total alkalinity in any reactor at the optimum reactor volumetric ratio of 1:1.5:5 were responsible for the highest observed methanogenic activity of the studied system, because the higher the solution pH and the total alkalinity, the higher the accumulated VFAs to be in the dissociated forms that are less toxic to microbial cells than the free acid forms. The high pH ranges in both R2 and R3 indicated that the 3S-ASBR can offer a higher process stability with higher methanogenic activity than either a single- or a two-step anaerobic digestion processes, as discussed later.

Fig. 2d illustrates the influence of the reactor volumetric ratio on the overall content and chemical constitution of the VFAs produced in each reactor. The produced VFAs in all three reactors contained HAc, HPr, HBu, and HVa without detectable levels of HLa and with a tiny amount of EtOH. For any reactor volumetric ratio, the ranked order of total VFA concentration was R1 > R2 ≫ R3. The overall VFA content in R3 was much lower than those in R1 and R2 and the reactor volumetric ratio only exhibited a significant effect on the total VFA concentration in R3. The greatest VFA concentration in R1 indicated that the rate of VFA production was much higher than the rate of VFA consumption. The lowest total VFA concentration in R3 (575 mg/L as HAc) appeared at the optimum reactor volumetric ratio of 1:1.5:5 (4 L:6 L:20 L). In contrast, the largest total VFA concentration in R3 (1830 mg/L as HAc) was found at a volumetric ratio of 1:1:3 (6 L:6 L:18 L), corresponding to the lowermost liquid volume of R3 which provided the lowest methanogenic activity.

The results lead to the conclusion that the lower the total VFA concentration in the last reactor of either a two-step or a three-step anaerobic system, the greater the methanogenic activity with a higher process stability. Interestingly, HLa was not detected in all the reactors at any studied reactor volumetric ratio, which is in contrast to the previous work where a high content of HLa was present in the first reactor [19]. This is because the 3S-ASBR unit of this study was operated under a moderate COD loading rate (10 kg/m^3d), whereas a higher COD loading rate of 18 kg/m^3d was employed in the earlier investigation [19], causing an overload condition in R1 to consequently generate HLa. In this study, the produced HLa was rapidly converted to smaller VFAs [36,37]. The main VFA produced in R1 was HAc, while HPr was the highest VFA in R2 at all studied reactor volumetric ratios. The results were well consistent with the previous result [14]. A high concentration of HPr can basically cause the instability in a single-step digester for methane production. In the 3S-ASBR, R2 was operated at a slightly high pH (∼6), causing a high tolerant level of HPr up to 4000 mg/L [19]. Small portions of HBu and HVa were found in R1 and R2, while in R3, the VFAs were only comprised of HAc and HPr with a tiny quantity of HBu.

Fig. 2e–f displays the mixed liquor volatile suspended solids (MLVSS) and effluent volatile suspended solid (VSS) values to approximately represent the microbial concentration and washout, respectively, at different reactor volumetric ratios. At all studied reactor volumetric ratios, except 1:1.5:5 (4 L:6 L:20 L), the MLVSS value steadily dropped in subsequent reactors (R1 > R2 > R3). The reactor volumetric ratio exhibited a significant effect on the MLVSS value in the last reactor (R3), consistent with the total alkalinity and total VFA concentration levels. The highest MLVSS values (31.0 g/L) in R3 were found at the optimum reactor volumetric ratio of 1:1.5:5 (4 L:6 L:20 L), and led to the highest CH_4 productivity of the whole system. The optimum reactor volumetric ratio also delivered the maximum total alkalinity and the lowest total VFA concentration in R3, resulting in the high settle-ability of the microbial sludge. As a consequence, the system had the highest methanogenic activity in R3.

The effects of the reactor volumetric ratio on the gas composition, gas production rate, specific production rates and yields of H_2 and CH_4, and the total energy production rate and yield of mixed gas are shown in Fig. 3 . The mixed gas was comprised of 46–59% CH_4 and 41–54% CO_2 with a tiny quantity of H_2 (0.15–0.2%) and a trace amount of H_2S (46–58 ppm). The high CH_4 content with the low CO_2 level appeared at a reactor volumetric ratio range of 1:1:4 to 1:1.5:5 (or 5 L:5 L:20 L–4 L:6 L:2 L). The H_2 portion in the mixed gas was extremely small (less than 0.2%) and remained almost unchanged with the reactor volumetric ratio (Fig. 3a) because the produced H_2 was mostly converted to CH_4 by reacting with CO_2 through the hydrogenotrophic methanogenesis pathway in R1, as mentioned before. The low H_2S portion in the mixed gas was at an acceptable level for internal combustion engines, depending on the engine type [7].

Fig. 3b illustrates the profiles of total H_2 and CH_4 production rates at various reactor volumetric ratios, which were consistent with the total gas production rate, as previously mentioned before. The production rates of both gases were significantly affected by the reactor volumetric ratio, with the highest H_2 and CH_4 generation rates also being obtained at the optimum reactor volumetric ratio of 1:1.5:5 (4 L:6 L:20 L). The HRT of R1 was approximately 21 h, consistent with the reported optimum HRT of 21.3 h for the H_2 production in a single-stage ASBR treating the same wastewater [21]. However, the very low H_2 productivity was due to the presence of methanogens in R1, as mentioned before. The ranked order of CH_4 productivity was R3 ≫ R2 > R1.

Fig. 3c demonstrates the profiles of the overall specific H_2 production rate (SHPR) and specific CH_4 production rate (SMPR) at different reactor volumetric ratios. Both the maximum SHPR and SMPR values were also found at this optimum reactor volumetric ratio of 1:1.5:5 (4 L:6 L:20 L), which corresponded to the production rates of both gases.

Fig. 3d–e shows the profiles of the total H_2 and CH_4 yields (based on total COD applied and COD removed) at various reactor volumetric ratios. They exhibited similar patterns to the SHPR and SMPR values. The results of SHPR, SMPR, H_2 yields, and CH_4 yields all corresponded to the H_2 and CH_4 production rates, with the highest values at the same optimum reactor volumetric ratio.

Fig. 3f depicts the overall specific energy production rate and overall energy yield profiles at different reactor volumetric ratios. Similarly, they reached maximum levels at the same optimum reactor volumetric ratio of 1:1.5:5 (4 L:6 L:20 L), where the system allowed suitable residence times and pH values to match the growth rates of the hydrolysis/acidogens, acetogens, and methanogens in R1, R2, and R3, respectively, as explained below.

The growth rate of any microbe is commonly expressed as its doubling time or generation time to indicate the time required to double its number. At the optimum reactor volumetric ratio (1:1.5:5), the dominant anaerobic digestion stages were hydrolysis/acidogenesis, acetogenesis, and methanogenesis in R1, R2, and R3, respectively. In R1, the two sequential steps of hydrolysis and acidogenesis were predominant but hydrolysis was much slower than that of acidogenesis. From the literature, the minimum retention time for completing hydrolysis and acidogenesis to form VFAs from carbohydrate is 12–24 h, while the doubling time of microorganisms in carbohydrate-wastewater and glucose-based artificial wastewater for these two steps is 5–21.6 h, with an average value of 13.5 h [38,39]. For acetogens, their generation times depends upon the nature of the substrate; being 16–19 h for HLa, 19–47 h for HBu, and 14–128 for HPr [40–42]. For the methanogenic step, the generation time of the mixed culture is in the range of 48–85 h for HAc as a substrate [38,43–45]. Hence, the generation time ratio is 13.5:16–128:48–85 or approximately 1:1–10:4–6, which is consistent with the optimum reactor volumetric ratio (1:1.5:5) obtained in this investigation.


3.2 Effects of the recycle ratio on the process productivity

Fig. 4 shows the impact of recycle ratio on the process productivity of each individual reactor and the total system of the studied 3S-ASBR unit at a volumetric organic loading rate of 10 kg COD/m^3d, total liquid holding volume of 30 L, and fixed reactor volumetric ratio of 1:1.5:5. A recycle ratio of 1:1 resulted in the highest levels of overall COD reduction and total gas generation rate of 90% and 176 L/d, respectively, (Fig. 4a). Interestingly, for any recycle ratio, the highest COD reduction was in R1, while the highest gas production rate was in R3. Increasing the recycle ratio caused the dual impact of reducing the NaOH requirement and HRT. The lower the recycle ratio, the higher the required amount of NaOH for pH regulation.

The use of NaOH to control the pH in R1 at 5.5 caused an increased Na concentration in the system. Although Na is required at a certain concentration to maintain the environmental osmotic pressure around microbial cells to regulate the mass transport of all materials through the microbial cells, a too high Na concentration can inhibit microbial activity. Moderate and strong inhibition levels of Na to methanogens have been reported to be 3500–5500 and >8000 mg/L, respectively [46,47]. In the current investigation, the Na concentrations in R1, R2, and R3 were 3095, 3302, and 3565 mg/L, respectively, at a recycle ratio of 0.5:1; 1079, 1224, and 1198 mg/L at a recycle ratio of 1:1; and 700, 825, and 948 mg/L at a recycle ratio of 2:1, respectively. Thus, moderate inhibition by Na to the anaerobes at the lowest recycle ratio of 0.5:1 was likely, causing the decreased process performance compared to at the two higher recycle ratios. At the highest recycle ratio of 2:1, the reduction in HRT was responsible for the decreased process productivity [46,47].

Fig. 4b displays the impact of the recycle ratio on the chemical composition of the produced gas in each reactor. The optimum recycle ratio of 1:1 resulted in the highest CH_4 contents in all three reactors. However, the CH_4 content was affected by the reactor volumetric ratio more than the recycle ratio. The effect of the recycle ratio fundamentally resulted from the different NaOH consumption and HRT in the whole system, whereas the reactor volumetric ratio influenced the HRT ratio and pH in each reactor, and so affected the microbial community fraction in each reactor, as described before.

The H_2 production appeared only in R1, and with very low levels of 0.66, 0.70, and 0.54% at recycle ratios of 0.5:1, 1:1, and 2:1, respectively. As previously explained, the return of methanogens from R3 to R1 in the recycle stream caused the high level on methanogens in R1 to consume most of the produced H_2, and so resulted in the low H_2 levels in R1 at all recycle ratios. The lowest H_2S levels in R1 and R2 were found at the optimum recycle ratio of 1:1, while the H_2S concentration was more or less the same in R3 in the different recycle ratios. The descending H_2S content in the produced gas in subsequent reactors (R1 > R2 > R3) corresponded to the increased solution pH, as described before.

Fig. 4c indicates the impact of the recycle ratio on the total alkalinity and pH in each reactor of the 3S-ASBR. Both the total alkalinity and pH values in R2 and R3, but not in R1 (pH controlled at 5.5), increased with an increasing recycle ratio, which would theoretically give a better process stability and higher methanogenic activity, but the influences of the recycle ratio on the Na concentration and HRT also have to be taken into consideration.

Fig. 4d shows the consequence of the recycle ratio on the total VFA concentration and composition in all three reactors. When the recycle ratio was increased, the total VFA concentration was significantly decreased only in R1, because of the dilution effect of the recycling. Interestingly, the total VFA concentrations in both R2 and R3 were at the lowest levels at the optimum recycle ratio of 1:1. As described earlier, increasing the recycling ratio contributed to a reduction in NaOH consumption (or Na concentration) and an increasing dilution rate (reduced HRT) in the system. At the lowest recycle ratio of 0.5:1, the system had the highest Na concentration, and was likely to cause a moderate inhibition effect. As a consequence, the lowest gas generation rate and COD reduction was obtained with the highest total VFA concentrations in all three reactors.

The total VFA concentration, especially in R3, can be used as a process performance indicator as the lower the total VFA concentration, the higher the process performance efficiency and stability. At any recycle ratio, the produced VFAs in all three reactors mostly contained HAc and HPr with small proportions of HBu and HVA. The tiny amounts of EtOH were only found in R1 and R2 at a recycle ratio of 0.5:1, which was caused by the moderate toxicity of Na to the microbes. The present results lead to the conclusion that the presence of EtOH at the lowest recycle ratio (0.5:1) can also be used as a process indicator to reflect a poorly imbalanced anaerobic digestion.

As shown in Fig. 4e–f, both the MLVSS and microbial effluent VSS in each reactor were significantly affected by the recycle ratio. In comparison between the two recycle ratios of 1:1 and 2:1, the microbial concentrations in all reactors did not differ much, while the microbial washout was slightly higher as the recycle ratio increased from 1:1 to 2:1. The moderate toxicity of Na at the lowest recycle ratio of 0.5:1 was accountable for the lowest microbial concentrations in the system, and so lead to the lowest process productivity. The results also indicated that the higher the recycle ratio, the higher the microbial washout, as a result of the increasing upflow liquid velocity and decreasing HRT with increasing recycle ratio.

Fig. 5 a shows the profile of mixed gas composition at various recycle ratios of the 3S-ASBR unit performed at a constant COD loading rate of 10 kg/m^3d, a bioreactor volumetric ratio of 1:1.5:5, 8 cycles/d and 37 °C. The recycle ratio insignificantly affected the CH_4 and CO_2 proportions in the mixed gas (58.1–58.8% CH_4 and 41.1–41.8% CO_2), while the H_2 content was extremely low (0.06–0.2%) because it had been anaerobically converted to CH_4, as mentioned before. The optimum recycle ratio of 1:1 resulted in the lowest H_2S content in the mixed gas, indicating that, at this optimum recycle ratio, the produced H_2S was mostly solubilized in the liquid phase, as correlated to the other two recycle ratios.

Fig. 5b displays the overall CH_4 and H_2 production rate profiles at various recycle ratios, which corresponded well to that of the total gas generation rate. The highest CH_4 evolution rate was in R3, whereas H_2 was mostly produced in R1 for all recycle ratios. The highest production rates of both gases were attained at the optimum recycle ratio of 1:1, because both the Na inhibition effect and the short HRT could be avoided at this optimum condition, as described before.

Fig. 5c–e illustrate the profiles of the overall SHPR and SMPR values and overall H_2 and CH_4 yields over different recycle ratios. The maximum values of all mentioned efficiency parameters, except for the overall CH_4 yield, expressed in mL CH_4/g COD removed, were found at the optimum recycle ratio of 1:1, consistent with the highest COD reduction and gas generation rate.

The highest values of the specific energy production rate (kJ/L d) and energy yield (kJ/g COD applied) also appeared at the optimum recycle ratio of 1:1 (Fig. 5f), consistent with the results of all the other parameters, and indicating the process performance efficiency. However, the optimum recycle ratio of 1:1 obtained from the present investigation cannot be applied as general design criteria for other wastewaters since the chemical composition of any wastewater directly affects the optimum recycle ratio. Hence, an experimental investigation is needed for any specific wastewater for determination of the optimum recycle ratio.


3.3 Micronutrient availability

Micronutrients, including Fe, Ni, Co, Cu, Mn, and Zn, determined in this work are the elements required in small amounts (10^−6 to 10^−15 M) to be constituents of cofactors in enzymes for their metabolic activities and microbial growth [48]. The most required metals for anaerobic digestion are Fe, Ni, and Co [49,50]. The Fe functions in transport mechanisms and metabolization of methanogens, while Ni, Co, Zn, and Cu are required for the production of vitamins and coenzymes by methanogens for CH_4 production [51,52]. Finally, Mn is important for anaerobic respiration [53]. Basically, these divalent cations (M^2+) can chemically bond with dissolved S^2− ions derived from the produced H_2S to yield the metal sulfide precipitates, equations (2)–(4), leading to the deficiency of some micronutrient elements in anaerobic digesters. FORMULA: H 2 S ( g ) ↔ H 2 S ( l ) ↔ H + + H S − FORMULA: H S − ↔ H + + S 2 − FORMULA: M 2 + + S 2 − → M S ( s )

As indicated in Table 2 , for any recycle ratio, all assayed divalent cation (micronutrient) concentrations dropped markedly after passing through each of the three reactors (R1 > R2 > R3), which was likely to be because of the progressive formation of insoluble metal sulfides [54]. The reactor volumetric ratio did not significantly impact the micronutrient concentrations in the effluents of all three reactors (data not shown). In contrast to the reactor volumetric ratio, increasing the recycle ratio tended to lower most of the micronutrient concentrations in each reactor due to the dilution effect (Table 2).

Interestingly, this 3S-ASBR system could maintain adequate levels of most micronutrients for anaerobic digestion, except for Cu, because the low pH (5.5) in R1 caused most of the produced H_2S to be in the free acid form present in the gaseous phase [13,55–59]. Furthermore, the lower amount of dissolved sulfide ions was partly neutralized by the high total alkalinity value [19]. In contrast, either single-stage or some two-stage anaerobic systems treating either the same ethanol wastewater or the other wastewater were found to have a deficiency of several micronutrients [12,34,54,55]. Voelklein and co-worker (2017) also reported similar results, in that the use of two-stage anaerobic system could increase the micronutrient concentrations compared to in a single-stage system. This is one of the additional advantages of the 3S-ASBR, apart from the optimization of the three sequential stages (hydrolysis/acetogenesis, acetogenesis, and methanogenesis) to augment the process performance efficiency.


3.4 Energy balance and COD balance of the 3S-ASBR unit

The energy balance as well as COD balance of the 3S-ASBR unit operating at a moderate COD loading of 10 kg/m^3d, a proper reactor volumetric ratio of 1:1.5:5 (4 L:6 L:20 L), a best recycle ratio of 1:1, 37 °C and 8 cycles/d are shown in Table 3 . It should be pointed out that the COD balance was only performed for the whole system since the recycle affected significantly the calculation for each reactor. Interestingly, the COD balance results had similar trends to those of energy balance. The reduced energy level in each reactor was mainly transferred to the produced gas (about 66%) with another fraction (30%) for the microbial metabolism and cell synthesis. The energy extraction efficiency was ranked as R3 ≫ R2 > R1, with a similar pattern for the energy uptake by microorganisms. The methanogens have the slowest growth rates, whereas the acidogens have the fastest ones, among the groups in anaerobic decomposition [6].

The higher the growth rate, the higher the energy requirement. The very high levels of the total specific energy production rate and energy yield of 110.7 kJ/L_R d and 11.1 kJ/g COD applied and 12.2 kJ/g COD removed, respectively, suggest that the studied 3S-ASBR outclasses a single-stage mesophilic ASBR treating the same ethanol wastewater but operated at a lower COD loading rate (6 kg/m^3d). The latter provided a lower specific energy production rate and energy yield of 51.6 kJ/L d and 8.6 kJ/g COD applied and 9.2 kJ/g COD removed, respectively, [12]. Compared to previous research on a 3S-ASBR system operated at a COD loading rate of 18 kg/m^3d and a reactor volumetric ratio of 1:1:4, this studied system clearly provided higher CH_4 and energy yields and even performed at a lower COD loading rate (Table 4 ).


3.5 Process performance comparison

Table 4 shows a comparison of the process productivity of the studied 3S-ASBR with other anaerobic digestion systems. A single stage ASBR could be used to produce H_2 (35–40%) with a very low energy yield of 0.6–1.37 kg J/kg COD applied by operating a very high optimum COD loading rate greater than 30 kg/m^3d at 37 °C. For the H_2 production using a single stage ASBR at 55 °C, the optimum COD loading rate was increased to 50 kg/m^3d. For the production of CH_4, the single stage ASBR system had to be controlled at a very low COD loading rate of 6 kg/m^3d to give a much higher energy yield of 11.59 kg J/kg COD applied. The studied 3S-ASBR delivered a superior process productivity, as expressed in the SMPR, CH_4 production level, and energy yield compared to all the other anaerobic systems [12,13,15,18,19,30,60,61], since both the reactor volumetric ratio and recycle ratio were optimized to provide the appropriate HRT ratio and solution pH with a high total alkalinity value in all three reactors optimized to allow hydrolysis/acidogenesis, acetogenesis, and methanogenesis to become dominant in R1, R2, and R3, respectively. The present results obtained from this investigation will play a vital part in future development of 3S-anaerobic processes for full scale application.


4 Conclusions

A new 3S-ASBR system was, for the first time of its kind, developed to enhance the CH_4 productivity and energy yield from ethanol wastewater by optimization of both the reactor volumetric ratio and recycle ratio. Under the optimum reactor volumetric ratio of 1:1.5:5 and recycle ratio of 1:1, the highest overall process productivity was achieved because of the finely balanced conditions for the three serial steps of hydrolysis/acidogenesis, acetogenesis, and methanogenesis to be predominant in R1, R2, and R3, respectively. The optimum reactor volumetric ratio was found to correlate strongly with the generation time of the microbes in the three serial reactors. The optimum recycle ratio of 1:1 could avoid the inhibition effect from Na with an appropriate HRT. The most important parameter to indicate the process performance of all anaerobic processes, including this 3S-ASBR system, was the total VFA concentration in R3. The optimum reactor volumetric ratio of 1:1.5:5 can be applied to all 3S-anaerobic systems, but the optimum recycle ratio of 1:1 obtained in the current investigation cannot be universally applied. This is because several factors, especially the chemical property of wastewater, can directly affect the total alkalinity and pH in R1. Therefore, the optimum recycle ratio of any specific wastewater can be either lower or higher than unity. For a future work, a 3S- ASBR or UASB unit with the optimum reactor volumetric ratio of 1:1.5:5 will be operated to determine a new optimum COD loading rate, in which is expectedly higher than those with other reactor volumetric ratios.


 Credit authorship statement

Kessara Seneesrisakul: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Funding acquisition. Todsapon Jantaruksa: Methodology, Software, Validation, Investigation. Achiraya Jiraprasertwong: Conceptualization, Visualization. Krittiya Pornmai: Conceptualization, Visualization, Pramoch Rangsunvigit: Conceptualization, Visualization, Supervision. Sumaeth Chavadej: Conceptualization, Investigation, Resources, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition.