TITLE: Impact of crop species on bacterial community structure during anaerobic co-digestion of crops and cow manure


1 Introduction

Crops and crop residues represent a large unexploited potential for methane production. The methane yield mainly depends on the organic content of crops degradable in anaerobic digestion (Amon et al., 2007). Cellulose together with hemicelluloses and lignin, the most abundant component of crop biomass, are found in the cell wall. Cell walls across crop taxa differ importantly in composition and the anatomical structure. Crops with poorly lignified cell walls are easily degraded, whereas crops with highly lignified walls may constrain degradation (Wilson and Mertens, 1995).

Anaerobic digestion of cellulosic material to methane is a multi-step process mediated by Bacteria and methanogenic Archaea (Chynoweth and Pullammanappallil, 1996). The polymers are hydrolyzed into soluble compounds under fermentative condition. Acidogens and acetogenic bacteria convert these intermediates into acetate and one-carbon compounds which can be converted directly by methanogenic Archaea into methane and carbon dioxide. Generally, hydrolysis is considered to be the rate-limiting step in the anaerobic digestion of cellulosic material (Veeken and Hamelers, 1999). Studies on the anaerobic digestion of cellulosic material have concluded that considerable concentration of cellulolytic capabilities exists among the order Clostridiales (Lynd et al., 2002).

Co-digestion of crops and cow manure for methane production is an option that has several benefits. The main advantages are improvement of methane yield, reduction of the emissions of greenhouse gas, methane and nitrous oxide, from waste management, and savings in energy costs (Alatriste-Mondragon et al., 2006). Technical performance during co-digestion of cow manure and wheat straw (Somayaji and Khanna, 1994), and forage beet silage (Weiland, 2003) has been investigated in the laboratory, but the microbial population responsible for the anaerobic digestion of crops and wastes has not been linked to substrate characteristics or digestion performance.

Here, the bacterial community structures involved in the co-digestion of sugar beet tops, grass silage, and oat straw along with cow manure were investigated by 16S rRNA gene-based terminal restriction fragment length polymorphism (T-RFLP), denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), and clone library analyses.


2 Methods


2.1 Biomass source

Grass silage (75% timothy Phleum pretense, 25% meadow fescue Festuca pratensis) and straw of oat Avena sativa were from central Finland, whereas tops of sugar beet Beta vulgaris were from southern Finland (Lehtomäki et al., 2007). All three plant materials were chopped to a particle size of approximately 3 cm and immediately stored at −20 °C. Cow manure was obtained from central Finland and stored at 4 °C.


2.2 Reactor operation

Four parallel CSTRs were inoculated with digestate from a mesophilic digester in Laukaa, Finland (Lehtomäki et al., 2007). The reactors were semi-continuously fed with cow manure at an organic loading rate (OLR) of 2 kg VS m^−3 d^−1 and hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 20 days for 27 days and operated at 35 ± 1 °C with a continuous stir of 300 rpm. One reactor was then run for additional 28 days with manure alone, whereas sugar beet tops, grass silage, and oat straw henceforth were fed each along with manure in the other three reactors (sugar beet, grass, and straw reactor) by replacing 10% of the feedstock VS with crop while maintaining constant OLR and HRT. The ratio of crop in the feedstock was then gradually increased up to 40%. Finally, the OLRs of the grass and straw reactors were increased first to 3 and then 4 kg VS m^−3 d^−1, respectively (Table 1 ). The samples for investigating the microbial communities were taken during the period when reactors were fed with 40% crop at OLR 2 and 3 kg VS m^−3 d^−1. They were taken soon after the feeding or OLR change (early E, day 9–15), after ca 1.5 HRTs operation (middle M, day 22–29) and after ca 2.5 HRTs operation (late L, day 49–50) and stored immediately at −80 °C.


2.3 T-RFLP analysis

Genomic DNA was extracted by using a FastPrep^® Instrument and a Fast DNA^® SPIN Kit for Soil (Qbiogene, Inc.) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Bacterial 16S rRNA genes were amplified using the primer set 27f-6-carboxyfluorescein (FAM)/1492r (Sait et al., 2003). PCR was performed in a reaction mixture containing 100 ng of DNA, 1 × PCR buffer, 200 μM dNTP, 2 U of DyNAzyme™ II DNA polymerase (Finnzymes), and 0.5 μM of each primer and followed the PCR conditions specified by Sait et al. (2003) in MBS PCR system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The PCR products were purified by a GenElute™ PCR clean-up kit (Sigma) and were quantified by a NanoDrop^® ND-1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop Technologies, Inc., USA).

Approximate 100 ng DNA was digested with 10 U of MspI for 3 h at 37 °C. Fluorescently labeled terminal restriction fragments (T-RFs) were separated on an ABI Prism^® 3100 automated sequencer (Applied Biosystems) using an internal size standard (GeneScan™ 1200 LIZ^®, Applied Biosystems). T-RFLP electropherograms were analyzed with GeneMapper^® software version 3.1 (Applied Biosystems). The analysis was performed for each DNA extraction in triplicate. Profiles from different samples were standardized to the profile with the smallest total fluorescent peak area intensity and then a 2% of percentage threshold was applied (Dunbar et al., 2001). The relative abundance of T-RF within a profile was calculated on the basis of the standardized peak area.


2.4 DGGE analysis

Bacterial 16S rRNA genes were amplified by nested PCRs, using the primer set 27f-1492r for the first PCR and 533f-907r^GC for the second one (Bodelier et al., 2005). The second PCR was performed using a touchdown program specified by Bodelier et al. (2005).

DGGE was performed using the INGENYphorU-2 × 2 system (Ingeny, The Netherlands) with a denaturing gradient ranging from 30% to 60% where 100% denaturant contained 7 M urea and 40% formamide. The gels were run at 100 V and 60 °C for 20 h and then stained for half an hour in Sybr-Gold^™ (Invitrogen, USA) (1:10000 dilution in TAE buffer) and photographed (Kodak 1D v.3.5.4 system).


2.5 Cloning, sequencing and phylogenetic analysis

The gene fragments amplified by the primer set 27f-1492r were subcloned into the vector pGEM-T Easy according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Promega). The plasmid was transformed into Escherichia coli JM109 competent cells (Promega). The cloned fragments were amplified from randomly selected clones by primer set T7-SP6 and purified for sequencing with Econuclease I-SAP enzyme (Fermentas) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Sequencing was performed with the 27f primer on an ABI Prism^® 3100 sequencer (Applied Biosystems) using an ABI BigDye^® terminator v3.1 cycle sequence kit (Applied Biosystems).

The obtained sequences with a range of 800–900 bases were checked for chimerical artifacts by the CHECK-CHIMERA program and uploaded to the MyRDP space in the Ribosomal Databases Project II (RDP-II) (Maidak et al., 1997; Cole et al., 2007). Homology search of the sequences against the sequences available in RDP II (release 9.58 February 2008) were performed with the SeqMatch program in RDP II. Finally, a phylogenetic tree was constructed by the neighbor-joining method and the Jukes-Cantor distance model with a PHYLIP 3.65 software package. Bootstrap resampling analysis for 100 replicates was performed. Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) were defined for sequences that shared greater than 99% similar.


2.6 Nucleotide sequence accession number

The nucleotide sequence reported in this paper was deposited in the NCBI nucleotide sequence databases under Accession Numbers EU551086 through EU551123.


3 Results and discussion


3.1 The bacterial community structures on the basis of their T-RFLP profiles and DGGE band patterns

The T-RFLP profiles revealed that there were both clearly distinct and also similar T-RFs in their respective bacterial communities in the different reactors (Fig. 1 ). A total of 31 T-RFs were identified in the three reactors. Among them, T-RFs of 157 and 540 bp, which together accounted for 15–31% of the profiles, occurred in all the analyzed samples. In contrast, a T-RF of 90 bp was only found in the sugar beet reactor. T-RFs of 89, 98, 180, and 422 bp were undetected in this reactor while they were often detected in the other reactors. The relatively abundant T-RF of 66 bp was observed throughout in the straw reactor whereas it was detected in the sugar beet and grass reactors only after the later operational period at OLR 2 kg VS m^−3 d^−1.

In addition, the abundance of T-RFs was observed to be related to the OLR. The abundance of T-RF 98 bp decreased in grass and straw reactors while the relative abundance of the T-RFs of 89, 180, and 422 bp increased with increasing OLR. However, larger changes in the abundance of these latter T-RFs were found in the straw reactor than in the grass reactor. Some T-RFs of 85, 134, 162, 176, 186, and 537 bp with a relative abundance of up to 10% of the total profile were present in the reactors only at OLR 2 kg VS m^−3 d^−1, indicating they were minor groups. Overall, the most diverse community was detected during the middle operational phase of the straw reactor at OLR 2 kg VS m^−3 d^−1. The reduction in HRT may have resulted in enrichment of the microbial species outcompeting for the essential resources in the reactor, whereas species with a less competitive advantage were removed from the reactor because of washout.

The DGGE analysis also displayed clearly dissimilar band patterns between the reactors and during the change of OLR. Most bands were recorded in the straw reactor. The DGGE band patterns also revealed clear changes along with the operation of the grass and straw reactors. The band patterns derived from the grass and straw reactors after the late operational period at OLR 2 kg VS m^−3 d^−1 showed great dissimilarity with those from the earlier periods. In addition, the band patterns between the grass and straw reactor showed larger difference at OLR 3 kg VS m^−3 d^−1 than 2 kg VS m^−3 d^−1.

The development of the bacterial community in the reactors obviously depends on the composition of the feedstock, and on the process conditions, such as OLR, HRT, temperature, and pH. When the present reactors were all fed with cow manure their methane yields and VS removals were very similar (Lehtomäki et al., 2007), which suggests good reproducibility of the parallel reactors with identical feedstock and process parameters. In the reactors the similarity was favored by the presence of manure (60% of feed VS) in all three reactor feedstock used as co-substrates. However, differences in population were obviously promoted by differences in the composition of these three crops. High lignin content was found in grass and straw (19 and 21% of TS, respectively), whereas in sugar beet tops lignin content was lower (10% of TS) (Lehtomaki and Björnsson, 2006).


3.2 Bacterial clone libraries

Three clone libraries were constructed from each reactor sample: (i) B and (ii) S library represented the sugar beet reactor and straw reactor at M with the OLR of 2 kg VS m^−3 d^−1, respectively, and (iii) G library represented grass reactor at M with the OLR of 3 kg VS m^−3 d^−1. In total, 11 OTUs were identified for B library (B1–B11), 19 for G library (G1–G19), and 12 for S library (S1–S12). In the G library, the most of OTUs were found to be closely related to species within class Clostridia and Bacteroidetes, whereas 3 OTUs were not affiliated with a specific phylogenetic group and assigned to unclassified Bacteria. The OTUs in B library affiliated to the class Clostridia, Bacteroidetes, Bacilli, and unclassified Bacteria. For S library, the OTUs related to the class Clostridia, Bacteroidetes, Acidobacteria, Deltaproteobacteria, and unclassified Bacteria. Apparently, the S library exhibited most phylogenetic diversity at class level, which is in good agreement with the observation derived from T-RFLP and DGGE data. The dominant component in B library was unclassified Bacteria, accounting for 47.4% of the total, whereas OTUs affiliated with the class Clostridia dominated in both G (50% of the clones) and S (53.3% of the clones) library. The unclassified Bacteria were found to be prevalent, accounting for 20% of clones, in both S and G library. In addition, OUTs closely related to class Bacteroidetes were much more in G library than in other libraries. A recent study (Cirne et al., 2007) also showed very few similarities between the microbial populations anaerobic digestion of sugar beets and grass, and the different dominant bacterial group in the two communities.

Sequence analyses showed similar phylotypes in the bacterial communities between the three reactors as shown in Fig. 2 . G1 (S1, B1) was commonly present in the three library, which was the dominant clone in the B library representing 42% of the clones. The OTU S3 (B3) and S2 (B2) were found in both S and B library. In contrast, distinct phylotypes in the bacterial communities between the three reactors were also observed. An OTU, S11, affiliated with class Deltaproteobacteria was detected only in the S library. In addition, a sequence related to class Acidobacteria was also only identified in S library. A sequence B11 clustered into class Bacilli was only found in the B library. Moreover, there were differences in specific methane yields and VS removals among the reactors. The highest specific methane yields and VS removals were obtained in the grass reactor, while the lowest value was found in the straw reactor (Lehtomäki et al., 2007).


4 Conclusion

The study showed that both similar phylotypes and distinct ones in the bacterial communities between the three reactors co-digestion of different crops along with cow manure. The results suggested that the development of bacterial community in these reactors was different.