TITLE: Multi-advantageous sorghum as feedstock for biogas production: A comparison between single-stage and two-stage anaerobic digestion systems.


1 Introduction

Anaerobic digestion (AD) is a keystone in the circular economy concept, having a crucial role in residue management and closing nutrient cycles, while biogas, as a renewable energy carrier, can be demand-driven controlled and regionally adaptable (Theuerl et al., 2019a). Among all biogas production feedstocks (Drosg et al., 2013; Theuerl et al., 2019a), crop biomass contains one of the highest energy contents. Nevertheless, controversies regarding land competition between crops cultivation for food and energy production are increasing, and selecting sustainable alternatives is essential (Brémond et al., 2020).

Sorghum, a C4 plant with great photosynthetic efficiency and biomass yield potential, proved to be a valuable alternative (Mahmood et al., 2013; Wannasek et al., 2017). Several authors reported high methane yields from sorghum (from 200 to 400 L_N kg _VS ^−1), which are comparable to the most frequently AD feedstocks such as maize or livestock residues (Herrmann et al., 2016; Pasteris et al., 2021; Wannasek et al., 2017; Yao et al., 2020). Sorghum can widely adapt to different environmental conditions, different climates and soil types (Amaducci et al., 2000), it has a soil-recovery ability suitable for degraded and marginal soils (Carcedo et al., 2021), it is tolerant to drought and has less fertilization requirement compared to other crops (Dar et al., 2018; Windpassinger et al., 2015). This untapped potential can be regionally exploited when coupling sorghum with biogas systems.

Biogas is generated in the final step of AD, which consist in hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis and methanogenesis. These steps are in constant interdependency, as metabolites of one group of microorganisms are precursors for the next step (Castellano-Hinojosa et al., 2018). When considering sorghum and fibrous biomasses composition, lignin content is critical due to its resistance to the AD. Additionally, sorghum carbon (C)/nitrogen (N) content can lead to acidification susceptibility of the system, limiting the final methane yield (Hu et al., 2021). Literature referring to sorghum biogas production is largely focused on biomethane potential studies using batch tests (Herrmann et al., 2016; Mahmood et al., 2013; Pasteris et al., 2021; Wannasek et al., 2017), and a few continuous AD experiments (Hu et al., 2021; Sambusiti et al., 2013). Ongoing technical developments and broaden knowledge regarding AD process and operation strategies using sorghum are needed.

One of the most used reactors in biogas plants is the continuously stirred tank reactor (CSTR) (Murphy and Thamsiriroj, 2013). It consists of a vertical digester, a feedstock inlet and a digestate outlet. The CSTR is continuously agitated, allowing constant contact between occurring microorganisms and feedstock nutrients, gas release from the liquid phase, and even process temperature distribution (Herrmann et al., 2018). However, a CSTR is a single-stage process technology with limitations for lignocellulosic feedstocks. Several authors reported frequent process instabilities caused by acidification, inhibition by elevated ammonium/ammonia (NH_4–N/NH_3) concentrations, and low organic loading rates (OLR) operational limits (Alavi-Borazjani et al., 2020; Herrmann et al., 2018; Srisowmeya et al., 2020). Furthermore, in CSTRs, equal distribution of lignocellulosic materials by stirring is difficult, and they tend to float and form scum layers (Murphy et al., 2011).

Two-stage AD systems are reported to be more suitable for these rich-in-solids type of feedstocks (Castellano-Hinojosa et al., 2018; Rajendran et al., 2020). A two-stage system configuration, comprising a leach-bed reactor (LBR) as a first stage technology, attached to a second stage anaerobic filter (AF) has been successfully applied to lignocellulosic biomass (Lehtomäki and Björnsson, 2006; Schönberg and Linke, 2012). In this system, mass transfer, nutrient and heat distribution are facilitated by a system's liquid percolation and the persistent material can be removed with the digestate at the end of the fermentation (Schönberg and Linke, 2012). As the process-involved microorganisms have different living requirements, being the methanogens the most sensitive to pH value, VFA or NH_4–N/NH_3 concentration changes, another advantage of two-stage AD systems comprises the spatial separation of the AD stages hydrolysis and acidogenesis from acetogenesis and methanogenesis, which frequently generate better conditions for the microorganisms avoiding acid accumulation, and enhancing methane production (Alavi-Borazjani et al., 2020; Rajendran et al., 2020).

The present research explores, for the first time, the effect of sorghum biomass characteristics on the AD process along with operational aspects, comparing a single CSTR and a two-stage LBR digestion system. The two-stage LBR system configuration is expected to prevent sorghum fiber floating and subsequent blocking of the system compared to the single-stage CSTR. Additionally, this study aims to identify sorghum AD operation strategies of both types of system configuration, assessing process stability parameters such as acid and/or NH_4–N/NH_3 concentrations. Finally, reactor type effect on sorghum final methane production, expressed as methane yield, methane productivity and methane content of biogas is evaluated.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Feedstock and inoculum

The feedstock consisted of a mix of two Sorghum bicolor L. Moench varieties (GK Emese and Sweet Susana; AgriSem GmbH, Einbeck, Germany), harvested during August 2016, at ATB's Field Research Station in Marquardt, Germany (52°28′01.7"N 12°57′37.2"E; 42 m above sea level; soil type: low loamy sand; annual mean temperature: 9.3 °C; annual average rainfall: 585.8 mm). For harvesting, whole sorghum plants were cut using a mounter forage harvester (Hege 212; Wintersteiger AG, Ried im Innkreis, Austria) coupled with a Kemper Champion 1200 (Kemper GmbH & Co. KG, Stadtlohn, Germany). Sorghum was chopped to a particle-size between 5 and 7 mm and ensiled. After 429 storage days, sorghum biomass was removed from the silos and samples were frozen at −20 °C until experimental requirement.

The AD inoculum was collected from an agricultural biogas plant using lignocellulosic feedstock (inoculum characteristics: total solids (TS) (% fresh matter (FM)) = 5; volatile solids (VS) (%TS) = 72; pH-value = 8.0; NH_4–N content (g L^−1) = 2.9; total acids (g L^−1) = 0.3; conductivity (mS cm^−1) = 22.1). Before experimental start-up, the inoculum was sieved using a 6 mm sieve and incubated for 7 days at 37 °C under anaerobic conditions to reduce residual gas production.


2.2 Reactors setup and operation


2.2.1 Single-stage CSTR

Two technical replicates of 10 L single-stage CSTRs (net volume 8 L) were operated in parallel, following standard procedures described in VDI 4630 (VDI, 2016). Each digester consisted in a double walled cylinder equipped with a gas tight lid, a feeding tube, a gas collection tube and a central tube for fixing the stirrer (Fig. 1 ). The axis stirrer was used to continuously stir the reactor content at a range of 100–120 rpm (High-torque overhead stirrer HT120DX, Witeg Labortechnik GmbH, Wertheim, Germany). The reactors were maintained at 37 ± 1 °C by a temperature controller unit circulating hot water within the cylinder double walls. A 40 L TECOBAG for gas analysis (Tesseraux Spezialverpackungen GmbH, Bürstadt, Germany) was used to collect biogas that passed through the gas collection tube for online daily analyses of gas volume (drum gas meter TG 05, RITTER Apparatebau GmbH & Co. KG, Bochum, Germany) and composition (SSM 6000, Pronova Analysentechnik GmbH & Co. KG, Berlin, Germany). Manual biogas measurements were implemented after week 34 due to equipment disruption, using a drum-type gas meter TG 05 (RITTER Apparatebau GmbH & Co. KG, Bochum, Germany) and a portable gas analyzer Biogas 5000 (Geotech by QED Environmental Systems, Coventry, United Kingdom). During manual measurements, biogas volume and content were analyzed once a day, on six days per week. Gas volume was normalized to standard conditions: dry gas, t_0 = 273 K, p_0 = 1013 hPa. Air temperature and air pressure were continuously recorded.


2.2.2 Single-stage CSTR operation

Systems operation and sampling scheme are summarized in Table 1 . The experimental sequence consists of four sections, named “startup”, “recovery”, “period 1“ and “period 2“. Each single-stage CSTR (called R1 and R2) was started at an OLR of 2.0 g_VS L_r ^−1 d^−1. The maximum OLR for these experiments was established in 3.0 g_VS L_r ^−1 d^−1, following typical OLR range applied for fibrous feedstocks (Weiland, 2010). Small OLR increments (0.25 or 0.50 g_VS L_r ^−1 d^−1) were performed until reaching stable operation conditions. The reactors were fed daily, six times a week. The reactors hydraulic retention time (HRT) was fixed at 60 days to avoid variations on gas production due to HRT changes. Volume of feeding was maintained at 160 mL per day, composed of determined sorghum silage and tap water amounts. For chemical analyses, weekly samples of reactors content were taken.


2.2.3 Two-stage LBR system

The experimental set up consisted in two technical replicates of a two-stage LBR system. Each system comprised: 1) a 12 L gastight LBR leach-bed reactor (net volume 10 L) which contained a perforate cylinder for solid (substrate) and liquid phase (reactor effluent) separation; 2) a 12 L percolate storage tank (net volume 10 L); and 3) a 12 L upstream anaerobic filter (AF) (net volume 10 L) entirely packed with biofilm carriers (Bioflow 40; Rauschert Verfahrenstechnik, Steinwiesen, Germany) (Fig. 1). At the beginning of each experiment, the LBR was filled with sorghum silage, following the schedule summarized in Table 1. Two internal circulations of reactor content were applied for nutrients distribution, moisture and temperature level maintenance. The first circulation system pumped 2 L of reactor content from the percolate storage tank back to the LBR every 2 h (140.5 mL min^−1). The second circulation system conveyed 0.44 L of reactor content from the AF to the percolate storage tank every 45 min (29.5 mL min^−1). One 60 L TECOBAG (Tesseraux Spezialverpackungen GmbH, Bürstadt, Germany) was used to collect biogas generated in both the LBR and the percolate storage tank, while a second 20 L bag collected biogas generated in the AF. Manual analyses of biogas volume and composition were performed using a drum-type gas meter TG 05 (RITTER Apparatebau GmbH & Co. KG, Bochum, Germany) and a portable gas analyzer Biogas 5000 (Geotech by QED Environmental Systems, Coventry, United Kingdom). Air temperature and pressure were recorded during the measurements and biogas volumes were normalized to standard conditions. Samples of circulating reactor content were taken from the two sampling points depicted in Fig. 1.


2.2.4 Two-stage LBR system operation

Table 1 gives an overview of two-stage LBR system operating conditions. The experimental sequence comprises four sections, each consisting of 2 or 3 repetitions, named section “1”, “2”, “3” or “4”, followed by a point and the number of repetition (either 1, for the first repetition, 2, for the second, or 3, for the third). The LBR was fed with 250–1500 g of ambient-temperature sorghum silage at the beginning of each section. Feeding was limited to a maximum of 1500 g by reactor size and bulk density of sorghum material. Each section had a duration of 30 days. During the first five days of AD, LBR and AF samples were daily taken for chemical analyses. Simultaneously, biogas volume and composition were measured. In the proceeding time period, sampling and biogas measurement intervals were enlarged to three times per week during the second and third week of experiment, and to two times per week at the fourth week. Upon each section conclusion, the remaining sorghum biomass, so-called digestate, was removed from the LBR, weighted, and samples were taken for analytical parameters determination.

No technical difficulties appeared until the last section repetition (4.2), which, after one week of operation, suffered from a blocking in the internal circulation setup caused by sorghum fibers. Consequently, no further data could be obtained from this section.


2.3 Analytical methods

TS contents of sorghum silage and digestion output were determined by drying the samples at 105 °C until reaching a constant weight. VS content was calculated by burning the dried samples in a muffle furnace at 550 °C, according to VDLUFA (2006). Silage elemental C and N content was measured using the DUMAS catalytic combustion, while ammonium content (NH_4–N) was measured by distillation, both methodologies described by VDLUFA (2006). Lactic acid content from sorghum silage and digestion output were detected via HPLC (Dionex, Sunnyvale, USA) with an Eurokat H column (Knauer, Berlin, Germany). Gas chromatography was performed to quantify contents of acetic acid, propionic acid, and butyric acid, which included butyric, iso-butyric, valeric, iso-valeric and caproic acid. VFA concentration (g L^−1) was calculated as the sum of the above-mentioned acid compounds, converted into acetic acid equivalents.

Furthermore, fiber fractions analyses (neutral detergent ﬁber, acid detergent fiber and acid detergent lignin) of sorghum silage and LBR digestate were determined using an Ankom2000 analyzer system and a fiber filter bag (Ankom Technology Corp., Macedon NY, USA), as described by Herrmann et al. (2011). Hemicellulose was calculated as the difference between neutral detergent ﬁber and acid detergent fiber, while cellulose was obtained by subtracting values of acid detergent lignin from acid detergent fiber.

Biochemical methane potential (BMP) tests of sorghum silage were carried out in triplicate in 2 L glass bottles at 37 °C for a period of 30 days, following standard procedures described by VDI (2016).

The pH-value, VFA concentrations including acetic acid, propionic acid and butyric acid, the ratio of VFA to total inorganic carbon (FOS/TAC) and NH_4–N content were measured from the reactors’ content for monitoring and evaluating process stability. A Sen Tix 41 electrode (WTW, Weilheim, Germany) was employed to measure the pH values. VFA concentrations and NH_4–N content were determined as described above. The FOS/TAC content was determined by automatic titration applying the FOS/TAC 2000 Titrator (PRONOVA Analysentechnik GmbH & Co. KG, Berlin, Germany).


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Feedstock characterization

Sorghum silage was assessed regarding silage fermentation chemical compounds, fiber fractions and BMP (Table 2 ).

Appropriate moisture and organic content for biogas and methane production were found in the sorghum samples. The silage presented low pH-value, dominant presence of lactic and acetic acid, insignificant presence of butyric acid and low alcohol concentration, indicating absence of undesired silage fermentation metabolism. These results are in concordance with typical values of good quality silages (Table 2) and with a previous study of sorghum varieties at the same cropping location (Pasteris et al., 2021). Contents of fiber fractions and chemical composition of the sorghum silage are comparable to ranges frequently found in other studies (Table 2). Nitrogenous compounds content in the feedstock was low, resulting in a supposedly high C/N ratio, although previous publications found even higher C/N ratios for different sorghum varieties, ranging between 45 and 78 (Pasteris et al., 2021). The C/N ratio is an important factor to evaluate AD processes (Chen et al., 2008; Srisowmeya et al., 2020). High C/N values indicate a deficit of the essential nitrogen needed for microorganisms to grow, while low C/N values are reported to affect AD stability, because of supposed NH_4–N/NH_3 accumulation, which usually leads to a pH rise and methanogens inhibition (Chen et al., 2008; Srisowmeya et al., 2020).

The sorghum silage average BMP was 345.6 ± 4.2 L_N kg_VS ^−1, comparably higher than average values for Sorghum bicolor L. Moench reported by several authors (Table 2). Both the chemical characteristics and the BMP results of the analyzed sorghum biomass are convenient for its use in single- or two-stage digestion system studies.


3.2 Single-stage CSTR

Both CSTR reactors (R1 and R2) showed similar performance during the experiments (Fig. 2 ). The startup section was characterized by increases of 0.5 units in the OLR from the initial OLR of 2.0 g_VS L_r ^−1 d^−1 until the final OLR of 3.0 g_VS L_r ^−1 d^−1 was reached (Fig. 2c). Methane yields and methane productivity during this section reached averages of 255.0 ± 33.7 L_N kg_VS ^−1 and 0.7 ± 0.1 L_N L_r ^−1 d^−1 respectively (Fig. 2a and b).

After six weeks, at an OLR of 3.0 g_VS L_r ^−1 d^−1, both reactors exhibited process instability indicated by acids accumulation (Fig. 3 a). VFA concentrations in both reactors increased during the startup section until an OLR of 3.0 g_VS L_r ^−1 d^−1 whilst propionic acid accumulated with 2.0 g L^−1 to the highest extent (Fig. 3a). These findings coincide with Sambusiti et al. (2013), who reported VFA accumulation in AD experiments with ensiled sorghum forage (OLR = 1.2 g_VS L_r ^−1 d^−1; HRT = 21 days) where acetic acid, propionic acid and iso-valeric acid appeared in high concentrations (1.5 g L^−1, 0.5 g L^−1 and 0.2 g L^−1 respectively). In addition, Hu et al. (2021) reported an elevated concentration of propionic acid (2.3 g L^−1) accumulated during mono-digestion of sorghum at an OLR of 2.3 g_VS L_r ^−1 d^−1. Accumulation of organic acids, in particular of propionic acid is reported to indicate an imbalance between acid producers and acid consumers, most probably an inhibition at both the bacterial and the highly sensitive methanogenic archaea (Klang et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2009). Generally, VFA accumulation under mesophilic conditions leads to a reduced buffer capacity, a lowered pH value and, hence, unfavorable living conditions for the archaeal community, which results in a drop of methane production (Srisowmeya et al., 2020). Such conditions were observed in the present study, indicated by a methane productivity declination of both single-stage CSTRs after the sixth week (Fig. 2b).

A commonly used parameter that indicates digesters' buffer capacity is the FOS/TAC value. Drosg (2013) postulated stable process conditions below a FOS/TAC value of 0.3. During the startup section, FOS/TAC values below this limit were detected for both analyzed reactors. Along with the increasing OLR, FOS/TAC increased to 0.5 exceeding the generally accepted critical point. A probable explanation is that, in general, an increase on FOS/TAC values results from an accumulation of VFA in the reactor, as it happened during weeks 10–12. Such situation is reported to occur alongside with large OLR increments in short periods of time, unbalancing the system's buffer capacity (Theuerl et al., 2019b). In the present study, the OLR was, therefore, decreased: a recovery stage at an OLR of 2.0 g_VS L_r ^−1 d^−1, followed by smaller increments (0.25 g_VS L_r ^−1 d^−1) on the OLR were performed.

During the recovery section in R1 and R2, methane yields, methane content and methane productivity maintained average values of 255.5 ± 10.9 L_N kg_VS ^−1, 55.9 ± 1.6% and 0.6 ± 0.1 L_N L_r- ^1 d^−1 correspondingly. After the recovery section, periods 1 and 2 were performed at OLR of 2.75 and 3.0 g_VS L_r ^−1 d^−1 respectively. During period 1, the digesters achieved the highest methane yield of the process, with a maximum of 376.5 L_N kg_VS ^−1. However, at the beginning of the week 25, the methane yield decreased to values just under 200 L_N kg_VS ^−1. As FOS/TAC values during this section were within the optimum range, variations of methane yield could have been produced by unsteadiness of gas release from the reactors resulting from formation of scum layers and floatation of fibrous sorghum material, which occurred in both reactors. Those circumstances even led to a blocking of the biogas outlet accompanied by small digestate losses on few occasions during weeks 26–30. Another explanation relies on the development of unfavorable process conditions regarding variations in TS content or NH_4–N concentration (Fig. 3b), which could affect the microbial community metabolism (Klang et al., 2019; Yi et al., 2014). The TS content increased during the experiment, reaching values up to 10% FM. While hemicellulose and cellulose are considered biodegradable in AD, lignin is not degradable (Mulat and Horn, 2018), which can lead to its accumulation in the reactors and contribute to increasing the TS content, as observed not only in the present study but also by Hu et al. (2021), resulting in a hampered mixing and gas release.

While TS contents increased, NH_4–N concentrations decreased below 0.5 g L^−1 during the experiment. NH_4–N is a crucial component for microbial growth, involved in amino acid, proteins and nucleic acids synthesis (Jiang et al., 2019), while a minimum concentration of approximately 0.2 g L^−1 is reported to be necessary (Czatzkowska et al., 2020; Klang et al., 2015). As NH_4–N is obtained by degradation of the feedstock's nitrogenous matter, sorghum's chemical composition was a key factor in the process stability and methane production. Furthermore, the FOS/TAC parameter started to increase after period 1, denoting poor buffer capacity of the systems. Therefore, addition of external ammonium was needed to stabilize the system.

Besides these chemical circumstances, during period 2 performed at an OLR = 3.0 g_VS L_r ^−1 d^−1, the methane yield exposed a slight increment, oscillating between 216 and 310 L_N kg_VS ^−1. From week 32 to week 34, a change from automatic to manual biogas measurement equipment was made due to malfunction of the automatic gas meter. Methane data of those three weeks is therefore not depicted (Fig. 2a and b, area c). The methane content kept constant values between 51 and 60% during the whole experiment and hence in an appropriate range, in concordance with Hu et al. (2021), who reported methane contents of sorghum in an average of 53%.


3.3 Two-stage LBR system

The highest methane production of the two-stage LBR system was obtained during the first two weeks of each section (Fig. 4 ) when the highest share of degradable substrate was available. After this period, availability of substrate declined due to discontinuous feeding of the LBR. This is in accordance with Linke et al. (2015) using the same system configuration for analyses of maize silage. According to each section's VFA profile, the highest accumulation of acids appeared as well during the first and second week of experiment (Fig. 5 ), which translated into maximum methane production rates. When considering the entire system, methane yields reached values around 300 L_N kg_VS ^−1, with maximum yield at the lowest sorghum loading. This result is slightly inferior to previously reported results using maize as feedstock (339 ± 16 L_N kg_VS ^−1) in the same reactor configuration (Linke et al., 2015), which is not surprising considering the lower fiber content of maize used in the aforementioned study. Another study reported also higher methane yields of maize compared to sorghum during batch tests experiments (Herrmann et al., 2016). On the contrary, Klimiuk et al. (2010) reported equal methane yield for sorghum and maize with similar fiber content in CSTR experiments. This discrepancy could be explained by the fact that the final methane production is not only related to the crop species, but also depends on the actual fiber content, in which especially lignin has been considered as the most significant influencing variable for specific methane yields (Herrmann et al., 2016).

In this study, the LBR produced generally higher methane yields than the AF. It can be therefore assumed that the stage separation did not avoid the development of methanogens in the LBR, indicated by high methane yields in this first stage. For both systems, the highest methane yield was at the lowest amount of sorghum added, but in general, the AF produced lower yields, maintaining values up to 100 L_N kg_VS ^−1. In the LBR, a slight tendency on methane yields declination when increasing the organic load was found. This can be explained by the VFAs concentration of the reactor: the higher the organic load, the larger amounts of acids were found. In the AF, temporally high values up to 4.7 g L^−1 were observed after start of the batches. In all cases, acids concentration was higher in the LBR than in the AF, but in both reactors, VFAs were quickly degraded during the experiment, meaning that VFA values increased but did not result in reactor failure because of acids inhibition. Cysneiros et al. (2008), in their studies of maize silage in a LBR coupled by an AF, found VFA degradation and higher biogas production in the LBR as well as in the AF. The authors consider that the buffer capacity of the LBR was optimum to allow a methanogenic community to persist in the reactor, which allowed the removal of VFA and consequent biogas production in the LBR itself. This last fact could explain the higher methane production in the LBR, compared to the AF of the present study, as well as acetogenesis and methanogenesis microorganisms’ metabolisms, which degrade VFA (Castellano-Hinojosa et al., 2018).

Nevertheless, stage separation led to beneficial conditions for the methanogenic community in the AF, which is revealed by the higher methane content in the biogas produced. Methane contents of the two-stage LBR system ranged between 22 and 64%, but the AF contributed the highest portion, reaching up to 78%. Srisowmeya et al. (2020) obtained similar results, concluding that two-stage AD systems promote archaeal greater performance, growth, and diversity than single-stage processes. Generally, biogas methane content in the LBR and in the AF was low exactly after the feeding date of each experimental section but showed maximum values after the first week of operation. As Linke et al. (2015) explained in their publication, in which biogas from maize silage in a two-stage-LBR system also produced poor-methane biogas just after the feeding date, the silage's low pH (<4) could have caused a momentaneous shock in the involved microbial community, disadvantaging the methane production. Despite this, in the present study the system's buffering capacity rapidly stabilized the conditions for methane production, expressed by the increment of biogas methane content in the following days.

Similar to CSTRs, two-stage LBR systems were characterized by constant decrease of NH_4–N concentrations, reaching values below 2.3 g L^−1 in both LBR (and percolate storage tank) and AF, which is considered as sufficient for microbial growth (see section 3.2). The inherent nature of sorghum silage, like other fibrous crops, is usually rich in carbohydrates but lacks nitrogen content (Sawatdeenarunat et al., 2015). With no additional source of nitrogen and its use by microorganisms’ metabolism, NH_4–N concentrations might have further decreased over time. Although the NH_4–N concentration of the LBR maintained sufficient values, its decrement might have affected the C/N balance, essential for the microbial community.

Regarding the LBR digestate fiber composition, hemicellulose and cellulose content ranged from 21 to 24% in TS, and from 23% to 26% in TS, respectively, regardless of the sorghum amount added (Table 3 ). Notwithstanding the section, digestates' lignin content maintained averages of 17 ± 0.4% in TS. VS degradation ranged between 68% and 77%, indicating optimal hydrolysis efficiency, similar to reported values of 89% and 60% for sugar beet and grass silage in hydrolysis/acidogenesis reactors, respectively (Cirne et al., 2007). On average, 75 ± 0.6% of hemicellulose and 75 ± 1.0% of cellulose was converted into biogas in this study. This is partly contrary to results of AD of dairy feces (Yue et al., 2011), and rye silages and barley straw (Schönberg and Linke, 2012). Those authors reported that microorganisms prefer specific biomass compounds to others, noticing that hemicellulose was degraded and metabolized in higher rates than other structural components. In the present study, digestates’ lignin content was considerably higher compared to lignin concentration of the feedstock. No clear degradation of lignin could be detected, which is not surprising considering its anaerobic degradability resistance (Mulat and Horn, 2018).


3.4 Comparison of both systems

The two-stage LBR system showed higher methane yield compared to the single-stage CSTR (Table 4 ). Additionally, biodegradability index values of the single-stage CSTR and the two-stage LBR system reached adequate results (above 70% of the BMP), which is in accordance with previous studies (Schönberg and Linke, 2012).

Methane productivity of the single-stage CSTR showed higher values than the two-stage LBR system. These results are dependent on the organic load added to the digesters. Hereof, addition of higher sorghum amounts to the LBR was restricted by the equipment characteristics and the operational set up (i.e. batch operation mode, bulk density of sorghum, time needed for sorghum digestion). This was unexpected as previous studies reported higher possible OLRs for high solid AD systems such as the LBR (Fagbohungbe et al., 2015). Nevertheless, as demonstrated in the present study, this does not apply to LBR operated in batch mode. When compared with the CSTR, higher LBR volume is necessary to obtain equivalent gas production, which signifies a disadvantage of this kind of system.

Regarding VFAs, no acidification occurred in the two-stage LBR system, neither in the LBR nor in the AF. This supports the hypothesis that, in contrast to the single-stage CSTR system, two-stage systems enhance methane production since methanogenic inhibition by acids accumulation is avoided, especially when reactor content recirculation is involved (Alavi-Borazjani et al., 2020; Herrmann et al., 2018; Rajendran et al., 2020). The CSTR showed higher propionic acid accumulation in comparison to the LBR, while the LBR revealed a peak on acetic acid content, which was completely reduced by the end of each section. The acids profile might have influenced the systems' stability and methane production. Accumulation of propionic acid is found to be critical for methanogens, while higher concentrations of acetic and butyric acid are beneficial (Srisowmeya et al., 2020). Additionally, Wang et al. (2009) stated that higher amounts of propionic acid decelerate the degradation rate of other VFA, retaining acidogenic bacteria growth. A constant TS accumulation occurred in the CSTRs, which could be critical for the process stability. In this sense, LBR's batch operation mode counteracts TS enrichment, because at the end of each section, all residual organic matter is removed.

In terms of functionality, the single-stage CSTR system allows continuous methane production; it is easy to operate and well known. However, sorghum mono-digestion in CSTR can lead to system acidification and process instability as recorded in this study. On the other hand, as the LBR is usually used for discontinuous high solid AD (Herrmann et al., 2018), it works as a batch system and requires a process re-start for each single batch, where new feeding and laborious work is needed. Additionally, as shown in Fig. 4, batch configuration leads to methane production fluctuations. Both systems have their restrictions, specifically for lignocellulosic feedstocks. For instance, blocking of the biogas outlet (CSTR) or the percolation system (LBR) occurred in the digesters analyzed, suggesting limitations of sorghum as AD feedstock. Moreover, mono-digestion of sorghum might not represent the best approach considering nutrients imbalance because of high C/N ratios. In this study, both digestion systems exhibited constant and critical declination on effluent's NH_4–N content, but the CSTR reached even lower NH_4–N concentrations than the LBR or the AF. To avoid this situation, several authors recommended co-digestion of lignocellulosic feedstocks with manure, stating its benefits on the C/N ratios optimization (Karki et al., 2021; Mata-Alvarez et al., 2014).

Further research is needed to fully understand the relationship between AD of sorghum and the process-involved microbial communities, to obtain a comprehensive view of the process and to elucidate potential microbial indicators for different process conditions that might explain the system reactions to the applied management measures.


 Data availability

Data supporting findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.


 Funding information

AM. Pasteris was supported by a scholarship entitled “Research Grants - Bi-nationally Supervised Doctoral Degrees, 2017/18”, provided by the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD; grant no. 57299293). This research was funded by the German Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture, managed by the Fachagentur für Nachwachsende Rohstoffe e.V. (FNR), grant no. FKZ 22001416.


 CRediT authorship contribution statement

Andrea Marina Pasteris: Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Monika Heiermann: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing. Susanne Theuerl: Writing – review & editing. Vincent Plogsties: Visualization, Investigation. Carsten Jost: Investigation. Annette Prochnow: Writing – review & editing. Christiane Herrmann: Supervision, Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing, All authors reviewed the results and approved the final version of the manuscript.