TITLE: Enhancing wastewater degradation and biogas production by intermittent operation of UASB reactors


1 Introduction

Anaerobic degradation is a technology which combines the treatment of residues or wastewaters with the production of methane, a renewable energy resource with least greenhouse emissions as compared with fuel alone [1–3]. Although anaerobic degradation of fat rich wastewaters (e.g. slaughterhouse, dairy) is very attractive form the point of view of the theoretical methane yield, continuous operation of Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) reactors with these effluents has proved to cause problems of a scum and sludge layer on top of the reactors with subsequent biomass washout, unstable performance and poor biogas production [4–6]. According to Jeganathan et al. [7], FOG (fats, oils and greases) accumulation is the factor that most influences the high rate reactor performance, rather than FOG concentration in the reactor feed. In continuous systems, adsorption of organic matter by anaerobic biomass occurs very rapidly in the sludge bed, but is not followed by an immediate biological degradation of the adsorbed organic matter since the kinetics of biological degradation is much slower than the adsorption phenomena [8]. In an investigation on slaughterhouse wastewater treatment in UASB reactors, Sayed [9] suggested that the most adequate form of treating complex fat-containing wastewater would be the use of flocculent sludge and intermittent feeding. This operating mode was also recommended by Lettinga and Hulshoff Pol [10] for complex wastewater, namely dairy wastewater. The intermittent operation consists of an interruption of the reactor feeding during a certain amount of time (feedless or stabilization period), allowing a more complete biological degradation of the substrates accumulated in the sludge bed during the feed period [11]. Several studies have been performed on intermittent UASB reactors as an alternative path to improve the methanization in anaerobic systems applied to complex fat-containing wastewater [11–13]. However, studies on the molecular identification of the microbial communities in anaerobic treatment processes based on cloning and analysis of the nucleotide sequences of genes encoding the 16S ribosomal RNA (16S rRNA) are quite limited [12]. Nevertheless, 16S rRNA-encoding genes from microorganisms of the Eubacterial phyla Proteobacteria, Chloroflexi, Firmicutes, Spirochaetes, and Bacteroidetes, and from the Archaeal classes Methanomicrobia, Methanobacteria, and Thermoplasmata, have been found in association with these anaerobic treatment processes [14]. The present work describes the application of a strategy involving the design and use of primers useful for the characterization of the microbial diversity inside UASB reactors, operating either continuous or intermittently.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Operation of UASB reactors

Three UASB reactors, made of Perspex, were used with a working volume of 6 L. The temperature was kept at (35 ± 1)°C by means of water jackets. Biogas production was monitored with wet gas meters (Schlumberger). The reactors were inoculated with flocculent sludge from a medium load industrial anaerobic reactor. The inoculation sludge had a specific methanogenic activity (SMA) of 6.9 ml CH_4/g VSS/day measured with sodium acetate at (35 ± 1)°C. The reactors were operated for 8 months. The intermittent UASB reactors (A and B) were operated with a feed period of 48 h with a hydraulic residence time (HRT) of 12 h, followed by 48 h without feed for sludge stabilization. The continuous UASB reactor (C) was operated with a 12 h HRT. The operating conditions resulted from previous optimization studies [11]. The three UASB reactors were operated with a global organic loading rate (OLR) of 14 g COD/l/day; during the feed periods the load for the intermittent reactors was 28 g COD/l/day. All reactors received equal amounts of feed COD in each 96 h period. The feed for the reactors was prepared daily, diluting semi-skimmed milk, nutrients and alkalinity with tap water.


2.2 Analytical procedures

All analytic determinations were performed according to Standard Methods [15]. The methane content in the biogas was analyzed in a Shimadzu model GC-9A gas chromatograph, equipped with a Supelco Molecular Sieve 5 Å column, and a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) (T = 100 °C). The injection temperature was 45 °C and Helium was used as the carrier gas (P = 4.4 kg_f/cm^2). Volatile fatty acid (VFA) analysis was performed in a Chrompack model 9001 gas–liquid chromatograph equipped with a CP-sil5-CB column and a flame ionization detector (FID) (T = 300 °C). Helium was the carrier gas (8 ml/min). Maximum column temperature was 290 °C and injection temperature was 270 °C.


2.3 Percentage of removal and methanization

The percentage of removal was calculated with the following formula: FORMULA: Removal ( % ) = COD t feed − C O D s effluent C O D t feed × 100

The percentage of methanization was calculated with the following formula: FORMULA: Methanization ( % ) = C O D − C H 4 C O D R × 100


3 Bioinformatics analysis of nucleotide sequences and design of primers

Nucleotide sequences of the genes encoding 16S ribosomal RNA were retrieved from the databases Ribosomal Database Project (http://rdp.cme.msu.edu/), SILVA (http://www.arb-silva.de/), GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank/), Green Genes (http://greengenes.lbl.gov/), and Integrated Microbial Genomes (http://www.jgi.doe.gov/genome-projects/). The CLUSTALW software [16] was used to perform the alignment of multiple nucleotide sequences, and to identify conserved regions. Primers were designed, based on the identified conserved regions of the 16S rRNA sequences, with the Oligo Primer Analysis Software (http://www.oligo.net/). Suitability of the primers to amplify their target sequences was assessed in silico using the ARB Probe Match tool (http://pmo.arb-home.de/).


3.1 Sampling, sample processing and DNA extraction

Samples from UASB reactors, operating either intermittent or continuously, were collected and immediately frozen at −20 °C for a period of time not longer than 1 week. For total DNA extraction, samples were brought to 4 °C, sonicated with a Branson 250 sonifier 3 times for 30 s, in order to release microorganisms entrapped within granules and other particles, and kept in ice until further processing. 1-ml aliquots were then passed through NucleoSpin filters (Macherey–Nagel) to remove solid particles. The total DNA was then extracted using the commercial kit “High Pure PCR Template Preparation Kit” (Roche), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. DNA concentration was estimated by assessing the absorbance at 240 nm, in a NanoDrop ND 1000 spectrophotometer.


3.2 Amplification by polymerase chain reaction, cloning, and sequencing of 16S ribosomal RNA-encoding genes

Amplification by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of 16S rRNA-encoding genes was performed using the primer pairs listed in Table 2. The amplification mixtures contained, in a total volume of 50 μl, 200 ng of total DNA as template, 50 μM of each deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate, 0.4 μM of each primer, 1.5 or 2.0 mM MgCl_2, 1 U of Taq polymerase (Bioline), and 5 μl of 10× reaction buffer (Bioline). After amplification, the DNA fragments were visualized after electrophoresis in 0.6% (w/v) agarose gels and ethidium bromide staining, following standard procedures [17], Amplification fragments were purified from agarose gels using the JetQuick kit (Genomed) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The purified fragments were then cloned and transformed into Escherichia coli DH5α using the commercial cloning kit “pCR 2.1 TA Cloning Kit” (Invitrogen), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Plasmid DNA was extracted from overnight grown cultures of transformed E. coli using the commercial kit “EasySpin Miniprep plasmid DNA” (Citomed), and the DNA inserts were sequenced, as a paid service, by the company Eurofins MWG Operon, using the M13 Forward Primer (5′-TGT AAA ACG ACG GCC AGT-3′).


4 Results and discussion

Results of the operation of the continuous and intermittent UASB reactors are presented in Table 1 . Soluble and total COD concentrations (CODs and CODt, respectively) were higher in the effluent from the intermittent operation than for the continuous operation because feed concentration for intermittent operation was twice as high as for the continuous operation. Other operational parameters, like pH and VFA were similar for both reactors (respectively 7.6 and 100–150 mg AcH/L) the VFA being slightly higher for the intermittent reactors with occasional peaks (up to 500 mg AcH/L). The average methane production for the intermittent operation was about 25% higher than for the continuous system. From an energetic point of view, this means that the intermittent operation would generate about 25% more electricity or heat after CO_2 removal from the biogas [18]. The average percentage of methanization of the removed COD attained with the intermittent operation was 88% as compared to 68% obtained with the continuous system. This result clearly indicates that the intermittent operation of the UASB reactor led to a more complete biological degradation of the organic matter, and a better adaptation of the biomass for the degradation of the complex substrates. COD balances are depicted in Fig. 1 for one intermittent cycle for reactor B and the same operation period for reactor C. The percentage of methanization of the removed COD that is accomplished during the feedless period of intermittent operation is around 11% of the total methanization obtained in the total cycle (feed period + feedless period). So the increase in the methanization reached by means of the intermittent operation is not entirely due to the surplus of methane produced during the feedless period. A large effect in the methanization capacity of the sludge also occurred during the feed period. The morphological analyses of the biomass developed in the intermittent and in the continuous UASB reactors showed marked differences, both in the type of microorganisms present and in their aggregation status (Fig. 2 ). In order to gain insights into the diversity of microorganisms thriving inside the reactors operating either continuously or intermittently, and to assess fluctuations in the composition of microbial populations in association with the different modes of operating the reactors, the molecular characterization of the microbial populations was performed. For this purpose, a strategy based on the design of primers specific for the major metabolic groups found in anaerobic reactors by other authors [14], PCR amplification, and cloning of the amplified 16S rRNA-encoding genes, followed by database searches for homologous sequences and alignments of the sequences obtained with sequences deposited in the databases was pursued.

A set of primer pairs were designed to specifically target the conserved sequences of the genes encoding 16S rRNA from microorganisms of the domains Archaea and Bacteria, previously reported to thrive inside UASB reactors [14]. For this purpose, 16S rRNA complete sequences form a total of 64 Euryarchaeota, 49 Crenarchaeota, 134 Firmicutes, 56 Bacteroidetes, 38 Chloroflexi, 144 Proteobacteria and Deferribacteres, and 54 Spirochaetes, were retrieved from the databases Ribosomal Database Project, GenBank, Integrated Microbial Genomes, Green Genes, and SILVA. The 16S rRNA sequences of microorganisms were aligned with the ClustalW software, and the identified conserved regions used to design the primer pairs shown in Table 2 . The primers were then synthesized as paid service by a commercial company (Eurofins MWG Operon), and subsequently used in PCR experiments using total DNA extracted from samples obtained form the reactor, as described in Materials and Methods. After optimization of PCR conditions, amplification fragments with the expected sizes could be obtained for all the 7 primer pairs designed, as shown in Fig. 3a. In order to minimize the sequencing of repeated clones, prior to ligation to the cloning vector pCR 2.1 and nucleotide sequence determination, the amplification bands were excised from the agarose gels, purified and digested with the HaeIII restriction enzyme. The restriction fragments were then separated by electrophoresis in 10% (w/v) polyacrylamide gels with 1× Tris-borate–EDTA buffer (TBE, containing 89 mM Tris base, 89 mM boric acid, 2 mM EDTA, pH 8.3), and stained with ethidium bromide using standard procedures [17].

The gels were then scanned in a Universal Hood II (Biorad), the images were captured by the software Quantity One (Biorad), and the restriction patterns obtained were analysed with the LabImage software (http://www.labimage.com/1d_software/labimage/index.html). This procedure allowed the built of a dataset of restriction profiles for the recombinant plasmids obtained with each group of primers, and thus the elimination of multiple sequencing of identical amplification fragments. Examples of restriction patterns, photographed after restriction of the amplification products obtained with the primer pairs described in this work, are shown in Fig. 3b.

A total of 49 distinct sequences were obtained, 22 from samples taken from the intermittent UASB reactor, and 27 for samples taken from the continuous UASB.

Analysis of the nucleotide sequences of fragments of the genes encoding 16S rRNAs, obtained with samples from the UASB reactor operating in the intermittent mode, revealed that 20 of these sequences matched already identified microbial species belonging to the Bacteriodetes, Chloroflexi, Proteobacteria and Deferribacteres, Firmicutes, Spirochaetes, Crenarchaeota and Euryarchaeota phyla. Moreover, 2 new 16S rRNA-encoding gene sequences not present in databases were found, one related to Chloroflexi and the other one related to Crenarchaeota. Analysis of the 16S rRNA-encoding gene sequences obtained with samples from the UASB reactor operating continuously revealed that these sequences matched those of microbial species belonging to the Chloroflexi, Firmicutes, Proteobacteria and Deferribacteres, Spirochaetes, and Euryarchaeota phyla. In addition, a total of 4 new 16S rRNA-encoding gene sequences not present in databases were found. These sequences were related to Chloroflexi, Euryarchaeota and Firmicutes. No 16S rRNA-encoding gene sequences related to Crenarchaeota were obtained in the continuous reactor. Altogether, and based on the total number of different 16S rRNA-encoding gene sequences characterized, our results indicate that a narrow range of microbial species is associated with the intermittent mode of operation. Interestingly, only from samples obtained from the intermittently operated UASB reactor were we able to detect 16S rRNA sequences related to Crenarchaeota. In addition, the relative percentage of 16S rRNA-encoding gene sequences related to Archaea organisms obtained with samples form the intermittently operated UASB reactor was 37%, when compared to the 20% in continuously operated reactor. This result suggests a higher abundance of Archaea organisms within the reactor when operated intermittently.


5 Conclusions

The intermittent mode of operation of UASB reactors treating dairy wastewater produced 25% more methane when compared with the continuous mode of operation, at an organic loading rate of 14 g COD/L/day. This means that 25% more electricity or heat would be obtained with this mode of operation and it has been demonstrated to be more effective in converting the removed COD from the influent to methane.

This paper shows for the first time, a molecular characterization of major microbial groups in continuous and intermittent UASB reactors and reflects marked differences between them. The intermittent mode of operation appears to have a higher relative percentage of microbial species of the Archaea domain (Euryarchaeota and Crenarchaeota), consistent with the observed higher methanization efficiency associated with this operating mode. Future work will address the quantification of the relative abundance of the microbial species using fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) techniques.