TITLE: Comparison of three biomass-retaining reactors of the ASBR, the UBF and the USR treating swine wastewater for biogas production


1 Introduction

Anaerobic digestion is a technology well suited for solving the environmental and social problems associated with animal wastes. The benefits that anaerobic digestion can bring to animal producers, such as useful energy generation (as methane) and organic waste stabilization, have been well documented in the literature [1–3].

Although anaerobic digestion technology has been widely promoted, its low efficiency becomes a problem in practical use. This is due, in part, to the slow growth rate of anaerobic microorganisms, particularly methanogens [4]. The primary factors determining efficient operation are microbial quantity and activity in the reactor. The microbial quantity depends on the ability to maintain a high biomass concentration within the reactor by effective separation of the biomass from the liquid phase [i.e., decoupling solids retention time (SRT) from hydraulic retention time (HRT)] [5]. Therefore, high-rate anaerobic treatment systems have become popular because of a higher ratio of SRT to HRT (SRT/HRT), a smaller reactor volume, and hence lower construction costs. Compared with traditional reactors, all high rate reactor designs except the contact reactor retain biomass by solid/liquid separation within the reactor with different configurations or operational conditions. For example, a three phase separation system is employed inside the upflow anaerobic sludge bed (UASB) reactor to control the sludge retention with good results. However, the UASB reactor rarely has been used to treat piggery waste because the composition of this waste, which is rich in nitrogenous compounds and suspended solids (SS), is not beneficial to the formation of granular sludge [2,6].

An upflow solid reactor (USR) derived from the UASB reactor is operated similarly, except that the three phase separation system of the USAB reactor is replaced by a baffle and a downflow weir. The USR relies on gravity settling of the solids to form a sludge blanket in the lower part of the reactor to achieve the retention of solids [7]. In addition, in the anaerobic filter (AF), maximization of the biomass concentration in the reactor is accomplished by immobilizing the anaerobic microorganisms on an inert support media [8]. Although the AF has long SRT and high tolerance against hydraulic shock loadings, high concentrations of SS in animal manure wastewater can adversely affect the performance of AF due to packing blocking [8]. To overcome the flaws of the AF, the upflow anaerobic sludge bed-filter (UBF), a combination of a UASB and an AF, was developed. The UBF reduces the chances of plugging by having a suspended growth system in the bottom of the filter. The biomass in the UBF has two parts, namely the attached growth on the carriers and dispersed flocs at the bottom of the reactor. This design gives the UBF a good performance in removing organic pollutants and entrapping SS [9]. The anaerobic sequencing batch reactor (ASBR) is operated in a controlled cyclic manner. This approach achieves long SRT while maintaining a low HRT due to internal clarification of the biomass prior to decanting [10], and makes it possible to overcome many operational limitations associated with the continuous stirred tank reactor (CSTR). Table A1 listed the advantages and disadvantages of the ASBR, UBF and USR in practical application.

In China, the applications of the USR, the UBF and the ASBR are widespread to treat livestock manure in biogas plants [2,11–13]. However, direct comparison of these three reactors to determine which is best has not been reported, and existing research is mostly focused on one single type of reactor. Differences in wastewater characteristics and operating conditions make it difficult to meaningfully compare the effectiveness of different reactors. Detailed performance data about the three reactors under the same experimental conditions are sparse.

There has strong concentration gradient in the reactor when mixing is insufficient, and complex substances accumulate to high concentrations in the bottom of the reactor. Thus, microorganism in surface layers may be deprived of essential nutrients [14], which can affect the composition and activity of the microbial community in the reactor. Although attention has been paid to the microbial community as a whole, little work has been done to investigate the microbial community at different reactor depths. Therefore, analyzing the variation in the composition of members of the domains Bacteria and Archaea with depth might assist in understanding why reactors perform differently.

Therefore, the aim of this work was to assess the performance of the ASBR, the UBF and the USR treating swine wastewater at 35 °C by operating at organic loading rates in the range of 2–10 g total solids (TS) L^−1 d^−1. For better comprehension of the reactor systems, analyses of the process kinetics and the microbial community structure were performed. The spatial heterogeneity of the bacterial and archaeal communities in the ASBR, UBF and USR reactors was also investigated. The research results provided scientific evidence for reactor selection and design.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Reactors

Each of the three reactors (ASBR, UBF and USR, Fig. 1 ) consisted of a 5.0-L cylinder (11 cm internal diameter, 55 cm liquid height). The ASBR was stirred 5 min h^−1 at 60 rpm. Polyhedral hollow ball fillers with 25 mm diameter were added into the top layer of the UBF as carrier for biofilm development, and occupied 20% of the reactor volume. A downflow weir and a circular damper with 9 cm diameter were placed at the top of the USR. To obtain a spatial profile of the monitoring variables, five sampling points were positioned at about 0, 10, 20, 30 and 40 cm below the liquid surface of each reactor.

The ASBR was operated in sequenced-batch mode consisting of four stages: filling, reaction, settling and drawing-off. Unlike the ASBR, the UBF and USR were operated in semi-continuous mode, namely feeding and discharge were processed simultaneously. Each reactor was equipped with a water jacket to maintain the temperature at 35 °C.


2.2 Swine wastewater and inoculum

Swine wastewater was collected from a farm located in Jianyang, Sichuan, China, 35 km away from the laboratory, thoroughly mixed, and frozen until used. The concentration of swine wastewater was adjusted to a TS content of 1.00% by adding the required amount of water before the start of an experiment. The inoculation sludge for the anaerobic digestion experiments was obtained from a full-scale digester that treated swine wastewater from the same pig farm. The TS concentration of the sludge was 8.80%. The basic characteristics of swine wastewater and inoculum were added in Appendix (Table S2).


2.3 Experimental operation

The effect of increasing the volumetric organic load on the performance of ASBR, UBF and USR was analyzed. The experiments were performed by reducing the HRT at a constant influent TS concentration until biogas production stopped increasing. Each reactor was inoculated with 2.5 L of the sludge. The reactors were initially fed at a loading rate of 2.0 g TS L^−1 d^−1, and this rate was increased to 10.0 g TS L^−1 d^−1 in steps of 2 g TS L^−1 d^−1, corresponding to HRTs of 5.00, 2.50, 1.67, 1.25 and 1.00 d, respectively. For each HRT, if the variation of effluent chemical oxygen demand (COD) concentration and daily biogas production were less than 10% within 2–3 weeks, the steady state was thought to have formed. After each steady state, the HRT was decreased to the next level.

Reactor performance was assessed by measuring various parameters for each experimental run. These were biogas production rate and biogas composition; pH of the influent and effluent; influent and effluent concentrations of COD, SS and volatile suspended solids (VSS); and VSS concentration with reactor depth, as well as on a representative sample of the packing of the UBF at the end of operation at each OLR.


2.4 Models for methane production

Yang et al. [15] developed a model to describe the quantitative relationship between the volumetric methane production rate and OLR. The precision and generality of the model has been validated previously and it was used in this study to estimate the methane production at a given organic loading rate. FORMULA: R p = R pmax 1 + e K D ( K LR − L r )

In Eq. (1), R_p is the volumetric methane production rate (L^−1 d^−1); and R_pmax is the maximum volumetric methane production rate (L^−1 d^−1); L_r is the organic loading rate (OLR) (g TS L^−1 d^−1); K_D is a dimensionless parameter, which serves as an index of the processing speed of R_p as it approaches R_pmax due to the change of Lr [15]; K_LR is the half-saturation constant (g TS L^−1 d^−1).


2.5 Analytical methods

Analyses of feed COD, TS, volatile solids (VS), SS and VSS were performed according to standard methods [16] and the pH of the wastewater was checked using a pH meter (inoLab pH 7200, Germany). The composition of biogas was measured using a Biogas Analyzer (BIOGAS 5000, Geotech, UK). A laser analyzer (Powder Analyse Instrument JL-1166, China) was used to measure the size distribution of the sludge.


2.6 Microbial community analysis

At the end of the OLR study, sludge samples were taken from four depths below the liquid surface (10, 20, 30 and 40 cm) of each reactor. Genomic DNA was extracted from each sample using the E.Z.N.A ^® DNA Kit (Omega Bio-tek, Norcross, GA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The V3–V4 region of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene was amplified using the primers 338F (5′-ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG-3′) and 806R (5′-GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-3′). The V3–V5 region of the archaeal 16S rRNA gene was amplified using the primers Arch344F (5′-ACGGGGYGCAGCAGGCGCGA-3′) and Arch915R (5′-GTGCTCCCCCGCCAATTCCT-3′) [17]. The DNA sequence was analyzed on an Illumina MiSeq PE300 platform at Majorbio Bio-Pharm Technology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). The optimized sequences were clustered into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) with a 97% similarity cut-off using USEARCH (version 7.1 http://drive5.com/uparse/). In addition, the Chao estimator was used to indicate the community richness and the Shannon and Simpson indexes were used to represent the community diversity. The entire DNA sequence data set has been deposited in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Sequence Read Archive (SRA) database (accession number: SRP133626).


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Operating performance of the ASBR, UBF and USR at different OLRs

The operating conditions of the ASBR, the UBF and the USR were compared at the steady state of each OLR as shown in Fig. 2 .


3.1.1 Effluent pH

The pH of the fermentation broth could be used to reflect the stability of the operation and low pH values indicated process disturbance [18]. As Fig. 2(a) shows, the effluent pH values of the ASBR and the UBF exceeded 6.8 at the low OLRs and then decreased to 6.7 as OLR increased to 10 g TS L^−1 d^−1. In contrast, the pH of the USR declined from 6.8 to 6.5 as the OLR increased and was below the optimal pH range for anaerobic digestion (6.8–7.4) [19]. A considerable decrease in the sludge concentration expressed as VSS with increased OLRs was observed in the USR as shown in Fig. 2(b), and sludge loading increased accordingly, which might have destroyed the balance between the rates of acidogenesis and methanogenesis. Consequently, an excessively low methanogenesis rate compared to acidogenesis rate led to volatile fatty acid (VFA) accumulation and then low pH [20,21]. This result showed that the USR became unstable at high OLRs.


3.1.2 COD removal efficiency

As shown in Fig. 2(c), the value of COD removal efficiency of the ASBR consistently exceeded 80% at OLRs of 2–6 g TS L^−1 d^−1, corresponding to HRTs of 5–1.7 d. Therefore, it was reasonable to operate the ASBR at a lower HRT (1.7 d) to reduce the ASBR investment and achieve more biogas production without adverse effects. Compared with the recommended HRT (4 d) from another study using ASBR to treat swine wastewater [22], our recommended HRT (1.7 d) was relatively shorter. The UBF had a similar COD removal efficiency as the ASBR, and it decreased from 91% to 75% as the organic loading increased. While the USR presented poor pollutant removal efficiency, its effluent COD concentrations exceeded 1 g L^−1 and the COD removal efficiencies were 4.8–14.9% lower than those of the ASBR and the UBF. For the USR, therefore, the HRT should be greater than 3 d to achieve higher COD removal efficiency (>80%). Liu et al. [23] suggested that the optimal HRT for a USR treating pig wastewater should be 15–20 d in engineering practice.


3.1.3 Volumetric methane production rate and methane yield

Increases in the OLR increased the volumetric methane production rate and decreased methane yield. A sudden decrease in the volumetric methane production rate was observed in all reactors at the OLR of 10 g TS L^−1 d^−1 as shown in Fig. 2(d), which demonstrated that the maximum OLR these reactors could accommodate was less than 10 g TS L^−1 d^−1. This finding was similar to results reported by Hashimoto [24] demonstrating that the maximum loading rate for unstressed fermentation was 7 g VS L^−1 d^−1 at 35 °C. The ASBR and the UBF had a similar methane production performance and both were higher than that of the USR. The maximum volumetric methane production rates of the ASBR, UBF and USR were 1.679, 1.669 and 1.234 L L^−1 d^−1, respectively, at the OLR of 8 g TS L^−1 d^−1. The serious loss of sludge from the USR probably was a reason for the poor methane production performance [as shown in Fig. 2(b) ]. However, the volumetric methane production rates of the USR treating swine wastewater in this study were obviously lower than the rates reported in the literature [11,23]. This was likely due to the lower influent concentration (1% TS) than was used in the referenced studies, which indicated that dilute swine wastewater was unsuitable for the USR.


3.2 Kinetics for methane production

Fig. 2(d) only qualitatively summarizes the effect of the OLR on the volumetric methane production rate. A quantitative description of the relationship between the OLR and the volumetric methane production rate is more valuable, as it provides critical information that is useful for reactor design and operation. The quantitative relationship between the OLR and the volumetric methane production rate was determined in our previous research [15] as described by Eq. (1). The high values of R^2 (0.9554–0.9999) confirmed the applicability of Eq. (1) to the ASBR, the UBF and the USR as shown in Table 1 . The values of R_pmax determined using Eq. (1) were 1.862, 1.788 and 1.318 L L^−1 d^−1 for the ASBR, UBF and USR, respectively. These values demonstrated the methane production performance of the ASBR was the best and was 4.14% and 41.27% higher than that of the UBF and the USR, respectively. The half-saturation constant (K_LR) in the model is equated with the organic loading rate where R_p is half the value of R_pmax and can provide information about the OLR that supports reactor design. K_LR was estimated from Eq. (1) to be 3.080, 3.029 and 2.393 g TS L^−1 d^−1 for the ASBR, UBF and the USR, respectively. These values indicated that the ASBR and the UBF could withstand higher OLRs than the USR. K_D serves as an index of the processing speed of R_p as it approaches R_pmax due to the change of L_r. Low values for K_D suggest low speed and indicate that a reactor has an ability to withstand high OLRs and correspondingly achieve high methane production. The values of K_D were found to be 0.454, 0.530 and 0.540 for the ASBR, UBF and USR, respectively. The results showed that the ASBR had a higher volumetric methane production rate approaching the maximum rate, and a potential for greater volumetric methane production than the UBF and the USR.


3.3 Comparison of the ability of ASBR, UBF and USR to retain biomass


3.3.1 Variation of SRT at different OLRs

In this study, no excess sludge was intentionally wasted from the reactors. Therefore, the steady-state SRT was calculated as a ratio of the mass of VSS within a reactor to the mass of VSS in effluent discharged from the reactor. The SRT variations of the ASBR, UBF and USR at different OLRs are shown in Fig. 3 (a). To prevent washout of key methanogenic bacteria, an SRT of 10 d is typically considered to be the minimum for mesophilic digestion [25,26]. For the ASBR and the USR, SRT values were variable in response to the OLRs examined and exhibited a decreasing trend due to variable losses of biomass within the effluent. SRT values of the ASBR reactor were more than 12 d at the OLRs of 2–8 g TS L^−1 d^−1 and always higher as compared to the other two reactors at the same OLR. This might be attributed to the sequenced-batch mode of the feedstock of the ASBR, which was suitable for sludge settlement. Nevertheless, the SRT value decreased to 7.9 d when the OLR increased to 10 g TS L^−1 d^−1 because of the disturbance to the sludge bed caused by frequent drawing and filling operations, as well as the biogas produced at high OLR. The SRT of the UBF exceeded 10 d at the OLRs of 6–10 g TS L^−1 d^−1, indicating a stable interception layer had been completely established. However, the SRTs of the USR were less than 7 d, suggesting a serious washout of biomass.

In general, an efficient reactor is one with long SRT and short HRT. Therefore, the advantage of a retained biomass system can be measured by the SRT/HRT ratio at a given influent concentration. Higher SRT/HRT ratio indicates better sludge retention performance of the reactor. An SRT/HRT ratio equal to 1 (namely, the SRT is equal to the HRT) is typical of a CSTR [19]. Fig. 3(b) shows that the three reactors exhibited various SRT/HRT ratios as OLR increased; however, the ratios generally increased with the increase of OLR. Conversely, Sanchez et al. [6] studied continuous feeding of anaerobic digesters and determined that the value of the SRT/HRT ratio decreased for increased values of volumetric organic loading rate. These results illustrated that the sequenced-batch and semi-continuous feeding modes used in this study were beneficial to the sedimentation of SS contained in the reactor. The ASBR had the highest SRT/HRT ratios at all OLRs except 10 g TS L^−1 d^−1, at which the UBF had the highest SRT/HRT ratio. The SRT/HRT ratio of the USR at low OLRs approached 1, indicating the sludge retention performance of the USR was close to that of a CSTR.


3.3.2 Particle size distribution of sludge with the depth of the reactor

The volume average diameter was selected as the particle size characterization parameter [27]. A comparison of the volume average diameter of sludge at different depths in the reactors is shown in Fig. 4 . In the ASBR, the floc size of sludge at the depth of 20 cm was 25.4 μm and obviously smaller than the average diameter of sludge at other depths. These small-size particles could be caused by shear forces due to stirring. The sludge size range in the UBF was 32.0–36.2 μm and more fine-sized particles accumulated at the depth of 20 cm due to interception by the packing. The larger sludge size was found in USR, which might be a result of intense washout of some sludge. The volume average diameter of sludge with depth in the USR was not significantly different, and the range of sizes was 32.5–35.7 μm, which suggested that the floc size distribution was not sensitive to depth in the UBF.


3.4 Microorganism distribution with the depth of the reactor


3.4.1 Estimation of richness and diversity

A shift in microbial community richness and diversity as a function of changes in depth in the reactor is illustrated in Fig. 5 . A higher microbial community richness was observed in the lower layer of the ASBR and the UBF as a result of a high amount of deposited sludge and accumulated complex organic macromolecular materials. However, distinct differences in community richness and diversity of bacteria and archaea between the sludge from the depth of 40 cm in the USR and the other depths of the USR and the other two reactors were observed. Although the community diversity of bacteria from the depth of 40 cm in the USR was consistent with that at other depths, the number of OTUs significantly decreased and was only a half that at other heights. The archaeal community richness and diversity at the depth of 40 cm in the USR were higher than those in other depths.


3.4.2 Bacterial community structure

The relative abundances of bacteria and archaea at phylum level and genus level in different depths in the ASBR, UBF and USR are shown in Fig. 6 . At the phylum level, the ASBR and UBF were predominated by Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes and Spirochaetae (accounting for 58.6–84.2% of bacterial gene sequences), which are main fermentative acidogens in an anaerobic digestion system treating swine wastewater according to previous research [28,29]. There was a slight decrease in the relative abundance of the three phyla in line with increased depth in the ASBR, accompanied by an increase in the number of Synergistetes and Proteobacteria. The composition and abundance of bacteria in the UBF were almost coincident with those in the ASBR. The USR, except at the depth of 40 cm, had the same the composition of bacteria as the ASBR and the UBF, but had higher abundance of Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes and Spirochaetae (accounting for 82.4–85.0% of bacterial gene sequences). However, the biomass from the depth of 40 cm of the USR presented an entirely different composition of bacteria, which was dominated by Proteobacteria (80.7%).

The threshold for “dominance” was adjusted to 3% in the genus level. The composition and relative abundance of bacteria in the genus level is illustrated in Fig. 6b and c. V2072-189E03_norank demonstrated absolute advantage in the upper layer of the ASBR, accounting for 35.6% of bacterial gene sequences, and then gradually decreased with increasing depth in the reactor, but remained the dominant genus. However, Leptospiraceae_uncultured became the predominant genus at the depth of 40 cm in the ASBR. These genera were affiliated with order Spirochaetales, which is known to ferment a wide variety of polysaccharides [30]. For the UBF, the species belonging to Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1 (order Clostridiales) were the most abundant, accounting for 20.0% of sequences, in the upper layer of the UBF. The members of the Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1 genus can convert saccharides (such as glucose) as energy sources to acetate, butyrate, lactate, ethanol, H_2 and CO_2 [31]. Bacteroidetes_vadinHA17_norank, affiliated to phylum Bacteroidetes, was the dominant genus in the middle and lower layers of the UBF and are found in environments undergoing complex carbon degradation [32]. The dominant presence of Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1 genus was also discovered in the upper and middle layer of the USR and other dominant genera included Lachnospiraceae_unclassified (order Clostridiales) and Treponema_2 (order Spirochaetales). However, Pseudospirillum, belonging to order Oceanospirillales, was the predominant genus in the bottom of the USR and is often observed in marine environments [33,34]. Several previous studies demonstrated that all cultivated members of the Oceanospirillales are heterotrophs known for their abilities to degrade complex organic compounds [35,36]. Rhodobacteraceae_uncultured and Salinihabitans from the Rhodobacteraceae family and Proteobacteria phylum were observed at nearly 14.11% of the total population as well. Many members of Rhodobacteraceae have been known to have a preference for low pH and are commonly found in aquatic habitats having significant amounts of soluble organic matter, low oxygen tension, and sufficient light levels, such as wastewater catchments, coastal lagoons, and rice paddy fields [37,38]. The pH of the USR at the OLR of 10 gTS L^−1 d^−1 decreased to 6.5 due to the serious loss of the biomass and the pH at the depth of 40 cm in the USR was only 6.2 (data not shown). In addition, the depth of 40 cm in the USR near the feeding port had a large amount of organic residues. Low pH and a high concentration of organic matter might be the important reasons for the unique bacterial community structure in the bottom of the USR.


3.4.3 Archaea community structure

Fig. 7 summarizes the taxonomic compositions of Archaea. At the phylum level, more than 92% of the archaea in the ASBR, UBF and USR (except at the bottom of the USR) were from Euryarchaeota, which is a well-known microorganism involved in biogas production. However, the archaeal communities at the depth of 40 cm in the USR were mainly represented by Woesearchaeota and Thaumarchaeota, accounting for 61.20% and 23.40%, respectively. Woesearchaeota are a new phylum-level lineage within the DPANN super-phylum of archaea with no cultured representatives [39]. Ortiz-Alvarez and Casamayor [40] reported that Woesearchaeota lacks important metabolic pathways, suggesting that this archaeon may have a symbiotic or parasitic lifestyle. The relative abundance of phylum Thaumarchaeota increased with reactor depth in the ASBR and the UBF, but the proportion was less than 5%, while it showed dominance at the depth of 40 cm in the USR. A previous study showed that some Thaumarchaeota have been able to oxidize ammonia aerobically [41] and might be the major ammonia oxidizing archaea [42].

The distribution of archaea at the genera level (Fig. 7b) showed that the dominant genera were Methanosaeta and Methanospirillum (77.71–93.62%) in all samples except that from the depth of 40 cm in the USR. In the ASBR, the archaea from the lower layer exhibited slight differences in abundance compared to other layers. For example, higher abundances of Methanospirillum and Marine_Benthic_Group_B_norank were observed in the lower layer, compensating the decrease of Methanosaeta. However, only 4.64% of archaeal gene sequences from the depth of 40 cm in the USR belonged to methanogens. The dominant genera were Woesearchaeota_DHVEG-6_norank (61.2%) and Candidatus_Nitrosopumilus (22.9%). Candidatus_Nitrosopumilus belongs to Thaumarchaeota phylum and is a marine ammonia oxidizer. A previous study conducted by Nicol et al. [43] across a soil pH gradient from 4.9 to 7.5 indicated thaumarchaeal amoA gene and transcript abundance increased with decreasing soil pH. The pH value in the bottom of the USR at high organic load of 10 g TS L^−1 d^−1 declined to approximately 6.2. Acidic conditions and low level of dissolved oxygen brought by a low-strength influent in the bottom of the USR near the feeding port, inhibited the growth of methanogens and instead formed an environment suited to microbes that are acid-resisting. Therefore, low abundance of methanogens in the USR was responsible for the low methane production from this reactor.


4 Conclusions

This research comparatively studied the performance of an ASBR, UBF and USR treating swine wastewater at mesophilic temperature (35 °C) and progressively increasing OLRs. In terms of biomass retention capability, pollutant removal efficiency and methane production rate, the ASBR performed slightly better than the UBF, especially at low OLRs. The USR had the poorest performance, in which a serious washout of sludge was observed. As a result, the effluent pH of the USR quickly decreased as the OLRs increased, and the pH in the bottom of the USR became as low as 6.2 at the OLR of 10 g TS L^−1 d^−1. Acidic conditions in the bottom of the USR inhibited the growth of the methanogens, and instead increased the populations of acid resistant bacteria.




[TABLE]

Caption: Advantages and disadvantages of the ASBR, UBF and USR.

Reactor | Advantage | Disadvantage

ASBR | • Simple design; • No short circuit; • Retention of biomass without fixed media or a solid-settling chamber; • High solids retention times; • Intermittent operation possible; • Extremely stable to hydraulic shock loads. | • Pressure fluctuation during feeding and withdrawing; • Difficult to decanting; • Production of negative pressure destroys reactor structure.

UBF | • Reduced clogging and biomass washout; • Short start-up time; • Containing both suspended and attached sludge; • High biomass accumulation; • Strong resistance to varying loading and operating conditions. | • Required of solid liquid separation equipment; • Relatively higher construction cost; • Not suitable for high suspended solid wastewater.

USR | • Flexible control and operation; • Low investment and operating costs; • No special gas or sludge separation required; • High biomass and solid retention; • High stability to organic shocks. | • Low efficiency of heat and mass transfer; • Inadequate mixing, resulting in the formation of the scum and the sediment.


[TABLE]

Caption: Characteristics of swine wastewater and inoculum.

Parameters | Swine Wastewater | Inoculum

Total Solid (TS) (%) | 1.00 ± 0.03 | 8.80

Volatile Solid (VS) (%) | 0.80 ± 0.02 | 5.23

chemical oxygen demand (COD) (g L^−1) | 7.617 ± 0.398 | –

Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD_5) (g L^−1) | 4.217 ± 0.165 | –

Suspended solid (SS) (g L^−1) | 9.386 ± 0.153 | –

Ammonia nitrogen (NH_3 N) (g L^−1) | 0.312 ± 0.051 | –

pH | 7.00 ± 0.19 | 7.05