TITLE: Anaerobic digestion of food waste in a hybrid anaerobic solid–liquid system with leachate recirculation in an acidogenic reactor


1 Introduction

Anaerobic digestion of solid food waste is considered as a perspective way for its disposal [1,2]. To increase process efficiency, two-phase anaerobic digestion can be used [3]. Liquefaction and acidification of food waste in this process are performed in an acidogenic reactor to obtain leachate containing dissolved organic matter, which is treated in a methanogenic reactor, where acetogenesis and methanogenesis are running. As hydrolysis of organic matter is a slowest step in an anaerobic process [4], its intensification usually leads to faster anaerobic digestion [5]. There are known different methods to facilitate food waste hydrolysis in an acidogenic reactor, such as mechanical reduction of particle size of digested material [6,7]; thermal pre-treatment of food waste to transform the organic solid material to liquid hydrolyzate [8–10]; and inoculation with cellulolytic bacteria from cattle rumen [11].

It is known from the practice of organic waste landfill management that a landfill leachate recirculation enhances microbial activity and shorten time required for waste conversion and stabilization [12,13]. Therefore, using hypothetic analogy, leachate recirculation in an acidogenic reactor may be the way to enhance extraction of organic matter from the treated food waste in two-phase anaerobic digestion. This assumption was tested in the hybrid anaerobic solid–liquid (HASL) system, which was developed to minimize the amount of food waste for disposal in Singapore [14,15].

The present paper is a part of the research on HASL-enhancing performance [10,16,17]. The aim of the present research was to study the effect of leachate recirculation in the acidogenic reactor on food waste anaerobic digestion in the hybrid anaerobic solid–liquid system.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Food waste, anaerobic microbial sludge and microbial granules

Individual food waste was collected from a canteen in the university. Waste was shredded into particles with average size of 6.0 mm in a Robot-Coupe Shredder (CL50 Ultra, Hobart, France). The artificial composition of food wastes used in the experiment was as follows (% of wet weight): vegetable roots, 50; orange peels, 20; rice, 15 and noodles, 15. The content of total solids (TS) was 20.3 ± 0.8% and the content of volatile solids (VS) was 76.2 ± 1.3% of TS in the mixed waste.

Anaerobic microbial sludge, used as inoculum for the acidogenic and methanogenic reactors, was collected from an anaerobic digester of a local wastewater treatment plant. The pH of sludge was 7.1; the concentrations of the total solids and volatile solids in sludge were 3.8 ± 0.1 g/l and 2.7 ± 0.1 g/l, respectively. The microbial anaerobic granules, adapted to high concentration of volatile fatty acids (VFA), were used as additional inoculum for the methanogenic reactor [18].


2.2 Characteristics and operation of the HASL system

The lab-scale HASL system includes an acidogenic reactor to treat solid food waste and an upflow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) methanogenic reactor to treat liquid leachate from the acidogenic reactor (Fig. 1a). Part of the effluent from the methanogenic reactor is used for the dilution of the acid effluent from the acidogenic reactor to maintain optimal pH for methanogenesis, and the rest of the effluent from the methanogenic reactor is recycled into the acidogenic reactor to avoid addition of water for food waste hydrolysis. An inner diameter of the acidogenic reactor was 140 mm and a height was 500 mm. Working volume of the reactor was 5.4 l. The working volume of the methanogenic reactor was 3.0 l with inner diameter of 90 mm and a height of 600 mm. The HASL systems were operated in a constant temperature room at 35 ± 1 °C.

Two sources of inoculum were used for the methanogenic reactor: anaerobic microbial sludge and microbial anaerobic granules. To start up the methanogenic reactor, suspension of microbial anaerobic granules, 1 l, and anaerobic microbial sludge, 1 l, were put into the reactor, which was fed with synthetic wastewater [18]. Concentration of chemical oxygen demand (COD) in effluent (less than 500 mg COD/l) and average methane content in biogas (exceeding 70% v/v) indicated that the methanogenic reactor was in active state and ready for connection with the acidogenic reactor.

Control and experiment were carried out simultaneously in two identical HASL systems operated for 2 weeks. Food waste, 200 g, 1 l of distilled water and 36 g of CaCO_3 for pH buffering were placed in each acidogenic reactor. Anaerobic microbial sludge, 1 l, was added into each reactor as an inoculum. Food waste, 200 g, was added after each 24 h to the control and experimental reactors during first 4 days of anaerobic digestion. So, organic loading rate for acidogenic reactors was 5.73 g VS/day during first 4 days of operation. Totally, 800 g of food waste with the contents of total solids of 130.4 g and volatile solids of 114.7 g were added into each acidogenic reactor in control and experiment. The flow rate of leachate from acidogenic reactor in experiment with recirculation was in 21 times higher than in control. However, volume of leachate supplied into the methanogenic reactor was stable for both system 1440 ml/day (Fig. 1). Excess of leachate was recycled into acidogenic reactor in experiment to ensure better conditions for extraction of organic matter from the treated food waste and to improve anaerobic process in the acidogenic reactor.

No leachate recirculation was in control, but leachate from the acidogenic reactor was recycled onto the top of waste in the acidogenic reactor in experiment (Fig. 1b). The ratio between volume of recycled leachate and volume of leachate supplied into the methanogenic reactor was 20:1.


2.3 Chemical analysis

The leachate from the acidogenic reactor and the effluent from the methanogenic reactor were collected daily for analyses. The pH value was measured using a pH meter (CORNING 145, Halstead, Essex, England). Total solids, volatile solids, and COD of the feedstock and digested food waste were determined in the well-mixed samples in triplicates by standard methods [19]. For the determination of VFA, samples were filtrated through Whatman 0.2 μm nitrocellulose membrane filters and were then analyzed using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (PerkinElmer, Series 200, Norwalk, CT, USA). The HPLC was equipped with a 220 mm × 4.6 mm polypore H column and a UV 210 nm detector. The mobile phase was 0.005N H_2SO_4 with a flow rate at 0.15 ml/min.

Gas production was monitored by a wet gas meter (Ritter TG 05, Bochum, Germany), while gas composition was analyzed by a Hewlett Packard GC HP5890A (HACH, Avondale, PA, and USA) for methane, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen. The GC was equipped with a thermal conductivity detector and a stainless-steel column packed with Hayesep Q (80/100 mesh). The operational temperatures of injector, detector and column were kept at 100 °C, 200 °C and 50 °C, respectively. Helium was used as a carrier gas at a flow rate of 40 ml/min. The pH, concentrations of dissolved COD and VFA, as well as biogas production and methane content, were determined daily.

All analytical determinations were performed at least in triplicate and mean values ± S.D.s are shown.


3 Results and discussion

Food waste was placed in the acidogenic reactors of control and experimental HASL systems without or with leachate recirculation, respectively. The results of anaerobic digestion in the HASL systems are shown in Fig. 2 and Table 1 . The pH was lower in control in comparison with experiment. The lowest pH in the leachate from the acidogenic reactor was 4.6 on day 5 in control and 5.1 on day 6 in experiment (Fig. 2a). The peaks of VFA and dissolved COD concentrations were higher and were reached in shorter time in experiment in comparison with control. The highest VFA concentrations in the leachate from the acidogenic reactors were 9450 mg/l on day 5 in control and 11,094 mg/l on day 3 in experiment (Fig. 2b). Notwithstanding that concentrations of VFA were higher in leachate from acidogenic reactor in experiment, pH of leachate were lower than in control (Fig. 2a and b). As shown earlier [10], pH values in leachate from acidogenic reactor of batch HASL system dropped rapidly to pH about 5.0, probably due to cells and vacuoles lysis, and after that slowly increased to neutral pH, probably due to hydrolysis of proteins and buffering of pH by released aminoacids. So, higher pH values of leachate in experiment could be hypothetically explained by faster hydrolysis of proteins and faster transfer the products of their hydrolysis in leachate under leachate recirculation.

The highest dissolved COD concentrations in the leachate from the acidogenic reactors were 16,670 mg/l on day 6 in control and 18,614 mg/l on day 5 in experiment (Fig. 2c). The concentrations of dissolved COD in the effluent from the methanogenic reactor were lower in experiment than that in control (Fig. 2c). The same positive effect of leachate recycling with the pH adjustment in the one-stage landfill-simulating reactor was shown by Vavilin et al. [20]. Total VFA, produced in the acidogenic reactor, and the VFA/COD ratio were similar in experiment on day 9 and in control on day 14 (Table 1).

The same volume of methane was produced for 14 days in control and for 9 days in experiment (Fig. 2d, Table 1). Maximum rates of biogas production were 3.9 l/day in control and 4.6 l/day in experiment. Therefore, recirculation shortened time for the production of same volume of biogas.

According to the results, increase of total COD, VFA, and methane production during batch anaerobic digestion of food waste for 14 days in experiment was higher by 11% than in control. However, anaerobic process in the acidogenic reactor was faster in experiment, especially during first 6 days of operation. VFA and COD concentrations in leachate from the acidogenic reactor on day 3 were higher in experiment than that in control, by 37% and 33%, respectively. Thus, recirculation of the leachate in the acidogenic reactor provided better conditions for extraction of organic matter from the treated food waste and for the pH buffering thus preventing excessive acidification in the acidogenic reactor.

The same amount of methane was generated during 14 days in control and during 9 days in experiment. This gives the opportunity to diminish operation time of batch process by 40%. It was supposed also that recirculation will be more essential for semi-continuous anaerobic digestion, when fresh food waste will be added periodically into acidogenic reactor on the top of semi-digested food waste. In this case, recirculation will play additional role as a source of hydrolyzing and acidogenic bacteria for the treatment of fresh food waste.

The effect of leachate recirculation in the acidogenic reactor on food waste anaerobic digestion in the hybrid anaerobic solid–liquid system was comparable with thermal pre-treatment of food waste at 150 °C for 1 h which helped to diminish operation time of batch process in HASL by 50% [10] and with freezing/thawing pre-treatment of food waste (food waste was frozen for 24 h at −20 °C and then thawed for 12 h at 25 °C) which gave the opportunity to diminish operational time of anaerobic digestion of food waste in HASL by 42% [17] in comparison with the anaerobic digestion of fresh food waste.


4 Conclusions

Recirculation of the leachate in the acidogenic reactor was proposed to enhance food waste anaerobic digestion in the hybrid anaerobic solid–liquid system. Recirculation of the leachate in the acidogenic reactor provided better conditions for extraction of organic matter from the treated food waste and enhanced buffering capacity preventing excessive acidification in the acidogenic reactor. It ensured faster supplying of nutrients in the methanogenic reactor in experiment. Use of leachate recirculation in the acidogenic reactor diminished time needed to produce the same quantity of methane by 40% in comparison with anaerobic digestion of food waste without recirculation. It was supposed that recirculation will be more essential for semi-continuous anaerobic digestion than for batch process. Application of leachate recirculation in the acidogenic reactor of a two-phase anaerobic digestion system led to intensification of anaerobic digestion of food waste and did not demand significant additional expenses.