TITLE: Effect of organic loading rate on the performance of modified anaerobic baffled reactor treating landfill leachate containing heavy metals


1 Introduction

The ever-growing population, economic shift and drastic change in the lifestyle has led to enormous generation of municipal solid waste which is ultimately disposed in sanitary landfills leading to the problem of leachate pollution [1]. The generation of solid waste was 1.3 billion tons in 2012, which was generated by a population 3 billion residing in urban areas with an objectionable rate of 1.2 kg/cap/d. Since the global population is increasing at a faster rate together with the tragic urbanization and industrial revolution the generation of solid waste is expected to get increased up to 1.42 kg/cap/d in 2025. This hiked amount is generated by a population of 4.3 billion residing in urban areas subjecting to 2.2 billion tons/year [2]. Since, landfilling remains the predominant method of municipal solid waste (MSW) management in most of the countries. The main objective of sanitary landfills is to stimulate the decomposition of waste under controlled conditions to obtain useful biogas. These landfills generate very complex wastewater, usually called sanitary landfill leachate [3]. Leachate is primarily generated because of precipitation falling on active landfill surfaces but can also be generated because of groundwater inflow, surface water runoff, moisture from deposited waste, and biological decomposition [3,4]. The pollutants present in landfill leachate can broadly be classified into 4 classes: organic matter, inorganic substances, xenobiotic compounds, and heavy metals. Risk of pollution in ground and surface water bodies by leachate and reduction of soil quality is the major environmental concern [5].

Sanitary landfills having the dumping capacity of 1000 tons/d can produce about 200–300 tons/d of leachate on daily basis which may vary depending upon the climatic conditions of the area and the moisture content of the solid waste disposed [6]. There are numerous factors which govern the composition of leachate (i.e., age, type, and composition of waste) but mainly depend upon the age of the landfill. The old leachate (>10 years) was found to be recalcitrant to biodegradation due to the long residue of organic molecules released from the solid waste [7]. The characteristics of landfill leachate plays a decisive role in the selection of treatment technology, which may be physical, chemical, or biological or may be combined. Anaerobic treatment involves the biological degradation of organic matter treating the wastewater and producing methane as a by-product. Anaerobic treatment has some of the pros compared to aerobic treatment such as (i) No aeration is required (ii) Lower excess sludge production (iii) Low nutrient requirement (iv) Lesser space requirement (v) Energy production in terms of biogas [8]. Anaerobic baffled reactor (ABR) system is compartmentalized by alternate hanging and standing baffles. This series of vertical baffles guide the wastewater under and over them facilitating closer contact of wastewater with the active biomass in the system. ABR is having some peculiar features like resilience to organic loading and longer retention times, preventing the solids washout. Studies have revealed its applicability in the treatment of various types of wastewater like textile wastewater, tannery wastewater, landfill leachate and brewery wastewater [9].

Organic loading rate (OLR) is the potential of the anaerobic reactor helping in the biological conversion capacity of the reactor and it depends upon the temperature and hydraulic retention time (HRT). Studies revealed that OLR effects significantly the anaerobic digestion taking place in the reactor in terms of degradation performance, intermediate metabolism, and biogas production. Sudden increase in the values of OLR may lead to decrease in chemical oxygen demand (COD) removal, pH, and methane production [10]. Increasing the value of OLR beyond the acclimatizing capacity of the anaerobic reactor may enhance the production of intermediatory fatty acids by the hydrolytic and acidogenic bacteria. These fatty acids will start accumulating as the methanogens cannot consume them at a faster rate leading to the lowering in pH and inhibition of methanogenic activity and sometimes may lead to the mass death of methanogenic organisms [11]. One of the significant and vital issue in designing and opting for a bioreactor in the treatment of wastewater is the time it takes in the start-up and removal of the specified pollutants. It is very important to study the performance of MABR by varying the values of OLR/HRT. Since the practical viability of an anaerobic reactor depends upon its performance at minimum possible HRTs. The HRT was decreased from 4 to 1 days to increase the OLR from 1.4 to 5.6 kgCOD/m^3/d. The study revealed that the modified anaerobic baffled reactor (MABR) system was stable in the removal of COD, color and heavy metals at an OLR value of 5.6 kgCOD/m^3/d.


2 Material and methods


2.1 Modified anaerobic baffled reactor (MABR)

The MABR is made of plexiglass and have a total volume of 44 L. The reactor is proportioned in 4 identical compartments and the working volume is 28 L (4 × 7 liters). Fig. 1 shows the schematic representation of the MABR system. The main purpose of the extra baffles (8.8 × 17 cm^2) was to reduce the solids washout and to maintain high and active biomass in the reactor. In the current study, landfill leachate was used to investigate its performance in treating real wastewater containing heavy metals. The MABR was designed and developed by [12].


2.2 Characteristics of landfill leachate

Landfill leachate was collected from Worldwide Landfills Sdn. Bhd. Jeram, Selangor. The landfill is having latitude 3° 28′ N and longitude 101° 08′ E and is 2.4 m above MSL [13]. The design capacity of the landfill is 1,250 tons/day that is equivalent to 8x10^6 m^3 and the total area of the landfill is about 160 acres. The characteristics of landfill leachate was analyzed and shown in Table 1 together with the standards of leachate disposal [14].


2.3 MABR operations

To maintain the uniformity in COD value (5600 mg/L), the HRT was reduced from 4 to 1 day which consequently increased the values of the OLR from 1.4 to 5.6 respectively as shown in Table 2 . Macronutrients N100 were used to overcome nutrient deficiency (from Bio-Systems Corporation Asia Pacific Sdn. Bhd.). The alkalinity of the feed was adjusted to 1000–2000 mg/L by adding NaHCO_3 to the feed whenever it is required.


2.4 Granular sludge

In this study, granular sludge was used as a seed sludge which was taken from an anaerobic digester treating food waste (Granular biocatalysts supplied by Paques Environmental Technologies). The granular sludge used in the study is a naturally occurring biocatalyst which is used extensively in the start-up of anaerobic reactors used in the treatment of wastewater. Biocatalysts (granular sludge) is resilient towards heavy metals as compared to sewage sludge, because of their exclusive structure where the methanogens are contained in the interior of the granules and the fermentative bacteria (more resistant towards toxicity) lies in the outer portion of the granule [15]. The granular sludge (Grey-black) used in the study is having the same boiling point as water, neutral pH, density 1 kg/l, with no reactivity at ambient temperature.3 L of granular sludge was fed in each compartment of the reactor system, therefore total of 12 L was fed in MABR system.


2.5 Sampling and analysis

Standard methods [16] were used for the analysis of the samples. Gas production was investigated individually for each compartment by Tedlar bags of 1-liter capacity and Bubble Counters. A timer is used for 15 min per hour to maintain the uniformity of temperature and avoid overheating of the compartments. Peristaltic pumps were used to regulate the discharge. Heavy Metals are analyzed in the lab using using an inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES). Samples were collected in superior quality screw-capped, high-density pre-sterilized 1 L polypropylene bottles. These were labelled properly and analysed in the laboratory for trace metals using an ICP-OES, which is an analytical technique used for the detection of chemical elements (Perkin Elmer/Optima 8300). The preservation and analysis of leachate were based on Standard Methods proposed by the APHA 3030 FB and APHA 3120B, Method No. 3111. Sample is analysed in the laboratory for color using UV–VIS spectroscopy (Merck/Spectroquant Pharo 300) on ADMI scale. The method being used for the determination of color is APHA 2120F.


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Variation of pH

pH is a key parameter in the anaerobic digestion of landfill leachate and previous studies have predicted the optimum pH for the anaerobic digestion is in the alkaline region. pH is required to be maintained for the stable and efficient operation of anaerobic reactors, some of the researchers have suggested that the suitable range of pH for anaerobic digestion is 6.5–8.5 [17]. Fig. 2 illustrates the pH variability in all the four compartments (C1, C2, C3 and C4) of the MABR as the OLR was gradually increased from 1.4 to 5.6 kgCOD/m^3/d by reducing the HRT. The pH levels in the MABR were in the range of 8 to 8.6, for all the OLRs investigated. These levels were well accepted for anaerobic digestion, as generally the accepted values are in the neutral range [8]. The pH in the ABR is determined by the alkalinity and the VFA concentration. As mentioned above, there is compartmentalization in the ABR, and the favorable pH of each compartment differs. Due to fermentative bacteria, the VFAs accumulate in the initial chambers, but the pH increases down the reactor due to a decrease in VFA concentration and an increase in alkalinity [18].

The souring caused by excessive accumulation of the VFAs can lead to process failure. Therefore, to prevent these fluctuations, pH can be adjusted using different substances like NaOH and NaHCO_3 [19].


3.2 COD removal efficiency

Fig. 3 illustrates the COD removal profile in MABR when HRT was reduced. The average COD removal efficiency of the process was 79.3% when the reactor was operated at HRT of 4 d and OLR of 1.4 kg COD/m^3/d. However, when the HRT was lowered to 3 d (OLR = 1.86 kg COD/m^3/d), the average COD removal efficiency was declined to 74%. Further reduction in the HRT to 2 d and 1 d, affected the COD removal efficacy slightly with the average removal of 69.5% and 71%, respectively. This implies that at higher values of HRT (4, 3 days) the anaerobic microbes get ample time to degrade the organic matter in the landfill leachate. Thereby increasing the COD removal efficiency of the MABR system. The reason for the decrease in COD efficiency while reducing the HRT is that the contact time of wastewater with sludge was reduced [20]. This study reveals that COD removal rate decreased upon increasing the OLR, may be because of the recalcitrant and complex nature of landfill leachate containing heavy metals that cannot be digested at the increased OLR (decreased HRT). The presence of heavy metals in the reactor system may cause toxicity in the reactor system when the OLR was increased to the maximum value that is 5.6 kg COD/m^3/d [21].

The performance of ABR was evaluated by Amin et al. [22] by varying the concentration of leachate and HRT. The values of HRT and the concentration of influent was varied and their effect on the reactor (ABR having 5 compartments) performance was studied. The results showed reductions in COD from 55 to 86% [22]. Burbano-Figueroa et al. [23] studied the consequences of OLR and sulphate loading rate (SLR) on the performance of a lab-scale ABR treating landfill leachate. The COD of landfill leachate was 3966–5090 mg/L with no traces of sulphate. ABR was started by feeding it by iron-sulphate, with SLR value as 0.05 g SO_4 ^2-/l/d. ABR was operated at an OLR range of 0.3–6.84 g COD/L/d, with the addition of SO_4 ^2-at a rate of 0.06 to 0.13 g SO_4 ^2-/L/d. COD removal of 66% was obtained at an SLR of 0.09 g SO_4 ^2-/l/d and OLR of 3.58 g COD/l/d. Burbano-Figueroa et al. [23] utilized sulphate for the consumption of molecular hydrogen and the organic matter was degraded in the methanogenic phase [23].


3.3 Volatile acids (VA) profile

VA are regarded as transitional compounds in the anaerobic digestion of landfill leachate. Their production in the reactor system is essential for the methanogenesis, i.e., the production of biogas. Nonetheless their accumulation may impediment the biodegradation process. Fig. 4 shows the VA profile when the HRT was decreased and OLR increased, together with the values of VA in different compartments at different OLR. The VA concentration in the effluent (C4) of the reactor was in the range between 37 and 57 mg/L HOAC, indicating the fatty acids were utilized by the microorganisms [24]. In anaerobic digestion, the substrate undergoes various stages of processes and converted into biogas through fermentative bacteria via volatile fatty acids, alcohols, monosaccharides, and amino acids in a hydrolysis process. These digested substrates were then broken down into VA in the acidogenesis process, finally, the methanogens convert VA into methane. In most cases, inhibition of biogas production happens due to rising in VA, resulting a decrease in alkalinity and pH [25]. The determination of VA was performed using DR 6000 Spectrophotometer. The DR 6000 Spectrometer was turned on and ‘Volatile Acids’ was selected from the stored programs. A 0.5 ml sample of deionised water was transferred using a pipette into a dry 25 ml sample vial. Separately, 25 ml of sample was centrifuged and then 0.5 ml of the supernatant was transferred into a second 25 ml dry sample vial using a pipette. 1.5 ml of ethylene glycol will be pipetted into each sample cell and swirled to mix. Then 0.2 ml of 19.2 N sulphuric acid standard solutions were pipetted into each cell and swirled to mix. Both cells were then inserted into a boiling water bath for three minutes. After three minutes, the solutions in cells were cooled using running tap water to a temperature of 25 °C. Then 0.5 ml of hydroxylamine solution was pipetted into each cell and swirled to mix, followed by 2.0 ml of 4.5 N sodium hydroxide standard solution and 10 ml of ferric chloride-sulphuric acid solution. Finally, 10 ml of deionised water was added to each cell and the cells were capped and inverted to mix. 10 ml of the solutions from each cell was transferred into separate clean dry square sample cells. The solutions were then allowed to be in the square sample cells for three minutes to allow reaction.

After three minutes, the square cell samples were wiped clean and the blank square sample cell was inserted into the cell holder with the fill line facing right. The ‘ZERO’ option was selected, and the display must show 0 mg/L Acetic Acid (HOAC). The square sample cell with the sample was then be wiped, inserted into the cell holder and the ‘READ’ option was selected. The VA value thus obtained and recorded.


3.4 Biogas production

Anaerobic digestion is being extensively used for the treatment of high strength wastewaters like landfill leachate because it has significant advantages i.e., lesser energy requirement and biogas production [26]. Biogas is also effective in promoting the concept of circular economy, which is based on reuse and recycling and may become the solution for resource crisis leading to sustainability [27]. Biogas is having various practical applications such as: (i) It can be utilized for the onsite generation of heat and power by using ‘combined heat and power’ (CHP) engines; (ii) It can be used as green alternative for natural gas; (iii) It can be used as substrate in fuel cells [28]. If the biogas production drops abruptly, it is an indicator that other process parameters like VA and pH may have changed and can lead to anaerobic digester system upset. A bubble counter having innovative design equipped with state of art regulator and an optical digital sensor that can measure biogas production was used in this study. Gas produced from the MABR was captured and measured in litre per day. Initially the bubble counter is calibrated then gas produced was captured and passed through a unique device (regulator) to produce uniform bubbles. Bubble counter is shown in Fig. 5 . Detected number of bubbles are digitally displayed on the electronic circuit. When the HRT is reduced, there is a hike in the values of gas production (Fig. 6 ) and the trend of increment of biogas is seen while increasing the values of OLR. The overall biogas production in the reactor was 0.1, 0.15, 0.32 and 0.4 L/day was observed at different and increasing values of OLR as shown in the figure also the trendline signifies the increase in the biogas production. This shows the stable behavior of MABR system during the anaerobic treatment of landfill leachate containing heavy metals. As it is known that the presence of heavy metals may lead to the reduction of the biogas production [29].


3.5 Color removal

Color is one of the significant and problematic component of landfill leachate which apparently exhibits the strength of leachate pollution. As the age of the landfill progresses the concentration of organic substances (humic and fulvic compounds) increases, indicated by the dark color of leachate [30]. The degradation of the organic matter may impart black or brown color to the landfill leachate [31]. The various technologies used for the color removal from landfill leachate are advanced oxidation (UV/H_2O), chemical precipitation, adsorption (activated carbon), fluidized biofilm reactor, nanofiltration, anaerobic reactors, chemical coagulation and ozonation [32]. Natural organic matter comprising of carbohydrates, polymerized organic acids and carboxylic acids are termed as humic compounds [33]. Therefore, a dark-colored liquid is an indicator of saturated organic content in the leachate [34]. When HRT was decreased followed by the increase of OLR, the removal of the color dropped considerably. The color removal dropped from 78.2% to 37.1% after an increment in OLR from 1.4 to 5.6 kgCOD/m^3/d. Color removal dropped may be due to the low HRT as the removal was 78% at HRT of 4d. One of the reasons may be the pH values which are appropriate for the anaerobic digestion may not be effective in the color removal of landfill leachate [34]. Fig. 7 shows the trend in removal of color at different OLR. The bars signify the influent and effluent concentration of color.

The influent (initial) color concentration was 5,140Pt-Co and the effluent concentrations reduced to 1120, 2190, 2305, and 3230 when HRT was reduced (4 to 1 d) followed by the increase in OLR values. Fig. 6 illustrates that as we go on gradually increasing the values of OLR the removal rate of color in MABR system is decreasing (as it dropped from 78% to 37%). Therefore, it can be concluded that the substrate is not getting enough time to be treated or degraded by the bacteria [34]. Colored water if discharged without proper treatment affects the surface water bodies in terms of aesthetics of water and inhibits the photosynthetic activities and may cause detrimental effects on the aquatic life. Therefore, efficient treatment is required before discharging the landfill leachate to the water bodies to avoid any regulatory sanctions [35].


3.6 Heavy metals removal efficiency

Heavy metals are one of the most hazardous substances present in landfill leachate. Main sources of contribution of heavy metals to the landfill and subsequently to leachate are electronic waste, paints, discarded batteries etc. [36]. Chromium concentration was found to be 2.8 mg/l in the sample collected from landfill site in Oman, which was much higher than the limits [37], Leachate concentration of chromium in Bangladesh was about 2 mg/l [38], and a maximum of 10.43 mg/l in landfill leachate in India [39] revealing the high concentration because of severely polluted leachate. The heavy metals which were present in significant amount in the landfill leachate during the sample collection are mentioned given in Table 1.

The objective of this section is to evaluate the heavy metal degradation in the MABR when the OLR was increased. Table 3 shows the effect of OLR on heavy metal removal. The heavy metal removal profile fluctuates according to the type of heavy metal. At OLR of 1.4 kgCOD/m^3/d, the As removal was 87.5%. However, when the OLR was increased to 1.86, 2.8 and 5.6 kgCOD/m^3/d, the removal of As dropped significantly to 66.6%, 41.6% and 8.3%, respectively.

Fig. 8 (a) shows the comparison between influent and effluent As. Heavy metals concentration in the effluent was considerably reduced, because of the accumulation of heavy metals in the granular sludge or the utilization of heavy metals by anaerobic microorganisms [40]. Similar trends were also observed for the removal of Cr, whereby the removal fluctuates when the OLR is increased {Fig. 8(b)}. Cr was reduced from 88.8% to 59.25% when the OLR was increased from 1.4 to 5.6 kgCOD/m^3/d. For Fe, it is also fluctuating as shown in Fig. 8 (c), when the OLR was increased from 1.4 to 5.6 kgCOD/m^3/d the removal reduced from 87.8% to 63.5%. Heavy metals retention capability of bioreactors decreases as the OLR is increased. Kawai et al. [41] explained the trend observed in heavy metal speciation in his study that by gradually increasing the OLR values the removal of heavy metals decreases thereby increasing the heavy metal concentration in the effluent, even though the removal occurred. Heavy metals present are known for their inhibitory effect towards methanogens [42].

Heavy metals can build-up complex substances with intermediate anaerobic digestion products and may get adsorbed to the biomass or the solid fraction present in the reactor system [43]. One key point to consider in this study was the stability of MABR system even at high OLR. The population of bacteria can tolerate the heavy metals present in the influent concentration upon increasing the OLR values (1.4–5.6 kgCOD/m^3/d). Current study confirms that MABR system can be used efficiently in the treatment of landfill leachate containing heavy metals. The concentration of heavy metals may have increased upon the increment of OLR values creating toxic conditions and inhibiting methanogenic activities [44]. A large anaerobic bioreactor was used to treat mature leachate having a flow rate as 20,000 L/d (operated for 729 days) the removal was found to be Zn: 50%; As: 73%; Cd removal: 59% [45]. Anaerobic Migrating Blanket Reactor (AMBR) technology was applied to treat young leachate OLR = 1–19.65 gCOD/m^3/d (operated for 280 days) the removal was found to be Pb: 42–55%; Cd: 42–55%; Pyrene (PAH):73% [46].


4 Conclusion

Technologies used for anaerobic digestion are mainly designed for treating waste with high water content (single stage slurry digestion) but there are fewer number of studies on the anaerobic treatment of landfill leachate containing heavy metals to produce biogas. The main purpose of this study was to investigate the efficiency of modified anaerobic baffled reactor (MABR), treating landfill leachate by varying the values of OLR. The variation of OLR does not cause any considerable decrease in the removal of COD, revealing the acclimatization of MABR system with increasing values of OLR. VA values in the MABR system were stable for the consumption of fatty acids by the microorganisms supplementing the production of biogas and preventing inhibition of anaerobic digestion of landfill leachate. The characterization of leachate showed hike in the concentrations of heavy metals (As, Cr, and Fe). Heavy metals present in landfill leachate can inhibit the methanogenic activity thereby affecting the biogas production which was stabilized by the usage of granular sludge and the configuration of MABR system. The results obtained show that the MABR system can efficiently remove the heavy metals (As, Cr, Fe) and color at high HRT of 4 days without effecting the production of biogas. The removal of heavy metals and color dropped at the lower values of HRT (3, 2 and 1 days) which reveals that the microbes are not getting ample time to biodegrade pollutants. For future work, an investigation should be conducted on various other wastewaters and heavy metals in the MABR system at an increased OLR to assess the effectiveness of the MABR system.


 CRediT authorship contribution statement

Imran Ahmad: Investigation, Methodology, Writing - original draft. Norhayati Abdullah: Supervision, Project administration. Shreeshivadasan Chelliapan: Resources, Formal analysis. Santhana Krishnan: Writing - review & editing, Visualization. Iwamoto Koji: Conceptualization. Ali Yuzir: Funding acquisition.