TITLE: Performance and microbial dynamics in packed-bed reactors during the long-term two-stage anaerobic treatment of tequila vinasses


1 Introduction

Traditional Mexican beverage, tequila, reached a production volume of 273.3 million liters in 2016, which represents a co-generation of more than 2733 million liters of distillery wastewater (i.e. vinasses), considering that 10–12 L of vinasses are generated per liter of tequila produced [1,2]. Tequila vinasses are mainly characterized for their low pH (3–4), high chemical oxygen demand (COD) ranging from 28 to 100 g L^−1 and high total solids (TS) concentration from 25 to 50 g L^−1 [2–4]. Nonetheless, such characteristics vary from batch to batch and from distillery to distillery, depending mainly on the agave age, cooking and distillation conditions used during the tequila production process. In this context, robust technologies need to be developed for the treatment of these effluents due to their complexity and high variability [5,6]. According to López-López et al. [3] around 80% of tequila vinasses are discharged directly into water bodies, municipal sewer systems or onto agricultural soils without receiving adequate treatment and consequently damaging the environment.

Current technologies implemented in some tequila industries involve pretreatment steps for cooling, solids removal and pH neutralization, followed by a combination of physical/chemical and biological processes such as aerobic treatment coupled to filtration and ozonolysis or anaerobic treatment coupled to flotation and aerobic treatment. These treatment trains can remove ≥85% of the COD contained in raw vinasses [3]. However, most of them require an advanced oxidation process in order to comply with the current environmental regulations for the reuse and/or discharge of wastewaters, highlighting the necessity for efficient and economically feasible technologies for tequila vinasses treatment. In this context, the valorization of the organic matter present in the vinasses by means of biogas production may contribute to the economic and technical viability of its treatment. In this regard, the two-stage anaerobic digestion approach has emerged as an alternative process for improving the conversion of the organic matter into methane at high organic loading rates (OLRs) [7], since the first stage acts as a metabolic buffer preventing inhibition of the methanogenic Archaea [8].

To date, several one-stage reactor configurations have been evaluated for the anaerobic treatment of tequila vinasses, such as the completely stirred tank reactor (CSTR) [2], anaerobic sequencing batch reactor (AnSBR) [9,10], upflow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) reactor [4] and upflow packed-bed reactor (PBR) [11–13]. In this context, it has been widely reported that suspended-cell reactor configurations are usually associated with microorganisms wash-out, and as a consequence, to poor performance at short hydraulic retention times (HRT). Therefore, fixed biomass reactors, such as PBR, which are able to retain the fermentative Bacteria and methanogenic Archaea by means of their immobilization on inert supports, are more suitable when short HRTs and high OLRs are applied [14].

Despite the fact that PBRs have proved to be efficient for converting the organic matter of tequila vinasses into a methane-rich biogas in one-stage processes [11,12], to the best of our knowledge, there are no studies focused on the COD removal and biogas production by using such reactor configuration in a two-stage process and much less for the tequila vinasses treatment. Therefore, the originality of this research lies in the evaluation of a two-stage anaerobic system composed of two PBRs connected in series for the treatment of tequila vinasses under different OLRs. Additionally, the performance of both PBRs was correlated with the microbial population dynamics in order to elucidate the main biochemical pathways that govern the acidogenic and methanogenic processes under different operating conditions.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Tequila vinasses and inoculum

Tequila vinasses kindly supplied by a tequila factory located at La Laja, Jalisco, Mexico were used as substrate. The main characteristics of the vinasses were: COD ranging from 30 to 50 g-COD L^−1, pH ∼3, volatile suspended solids (VSS) concentration of 9.8 g L^−1, and volatile fatty acids (VFAs) concentrations from 2.5 to 3.4 g L^−1, expressed as acetic acid. On the other hand, granular sludge from a UASB reactor, treating effluents from a local brewery was used as inoculum for both acidogenic and methanogenic reactors.


2.2 Two-stage system set-up and experimental design

The layout of the two-stage system is shown in Fig. 1 . The two-stage anaerobic digestion of tequila vinasses was carried out in two upflow PBRs interconnected through an intermediate tank for pH control. Both anaerobic reactors were made of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and packed with Cloisonyle© PVC tubes as support media for biofilm attachment. The working volume was 4 L for the acidogenic upflow PBR (A-reactor) and 8 L for the methanogenic upflow PBR (M-reactor). The temperature of both reactors was controlled at 35 °C by circulating hot water throughout the reactor jacket, while the pH was controlled at 5 and 7.7 by adding NaOH to the A-reactor and M-reactor, respectively.

Prior to the performance evaluation of the proposed two-stage PBRs configuration through different OLRs, both reactors were inoculated with the anaerobic granular sludge and operated independently under single-stage configuration at 35 °C and pH of 7.4 for biofilm development. For this purpose, the strategy reported by Jáuregui-Jáuregui et al. [15] based on the stepwise increments of COD and HRT was applied during 30 days. The optimal methanogenic biofilm development for both reactors was reached at HRT of 3 days and COD removals >80%. Thereafter, both PBRs were interconnected and operated at different pH values to select acidogenic and methanogenic populations, 5.0 for the A-reactor and 7.7 for the M-reactor. After 28 days (start-up phase), the VFAs concentration reached 40% of the total COD in the A-reactor, while a stable biogas production with a COD removal over 90% was obtained in the M-reactor.

After the start-up phase, the PBRs were operated during four stages at the OLRs showed in Table 1 . The vinasses were mixed with the liquid broth by means of a recirculation loop at a recycling ratio > 6 in order to ensure homogeneous conditions [16]. The effluent of the A-reactor was passed through a phase separator and collected in the intermediate tank (5 L working volume) for increasing pH to ∼7. Similar to the A-reactor, the liquid from the intermediate tank was mixed with the liquid broth of the M-reactor at the same recycling ratio. The applied OLRs in the M-reactor were computed by taking into account the OLRs and COD removals of the A-reactor, as well as the volume of the M-reactor.

Both reactors were fully instrumented for the on-line monitoring of pH, temperature, pressure and biogas flowrates through an interface created by using the LabVIEW 8.2 software. A National Instruments cRIO 9014 control device equipped with analogical and digital cards was used for data acquisition, treatment, and storage. The pH was monitored using Thermo Scientific Orion 8256BN sensors connected to the control device and controlled by supplying NaOH as required through remotely controllable peristaltic pumps (Daigger, model TX20714B) activated by an on-off control scheme. Dwyer 673-1 sensors measured the gas pressure in the headspace of both reactors, while the produced biogas volume was determined by liquid displacement. The released biogas was stored in Tedlar bags for its composition analysis by gas chromatography.

Effluent samples from both reactors were taken for monitoring the VFAs and COD concentrations according to the analytical methods described in Section 2.3. Biogas production and methane yields were reported at standard temperature and pressure (STP) conditions.


2.3 Analytical methods

Particular (acetate, propionate, butyrate, and valerate) and total VFAs concentration were measured by HPLC using a Watters 600 HPLC-UV chromatograph [11]. The soluble COD concentration was determined by the closed reflux colorimetric method using a HACH digester DBR200 and a spectrophotometer DR2800 according to Standard methods [17]. The biogas composition was determined by gas chromatography using a Perkin Elmer Auto-System XL gas chromatograph [11].


2.4 Microbial community analysis

In order to elucidate possible biochemical pathways involved in the two-stage anaerobic treatment process, biofilm samples of 5 mL were taken randomly from the bottom, middle and top of the PVC tubes. Samples were collected at the beginning of stage I and at the end of stages II and IV. Each sample was homogenized in a mortar containing 4 mL of 4 M guanidine thiocyanate 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.8) and 0.6 mL of 10% N-lauroyl sarcosine. Then, four 0.5 mL aliquots of the samples were transferred into 2 m L-microtubes and immediately stored at -20 °C. Later, genomic DNA was extracted according to the procedure reported by Godon et al. [18]. The genomic DNA size distribution and purity were estimated by electrophoresis (predominantly around 20 Kb), and spectrophotometric analysis using an Eppendorf BioPhotometer D30, respectively.

The abundance of Bacteria and Archaea domains in the collected biofilms was quantified by quantitative PCR (Q-PCR). The Q-PCR primers, standards, and reaction conditions were previously reported by Jáuregui-Jáuregui et al. [15]. The results were expressed as 16S rRNA gene copies/mL of sample, while the Archaea/Prokaryotes (A/P) ratio was calculated using the equation: A/P ratio = A/(A + B), when A and B are the abundances of Archaea and Bacteria domains, respectively. The identification of the Archaea and Bacteria population of each collected biofilm was determined by next-generation sequencing (NGS) using the sequencing service at Laboratory of Environmental Biotechnology INRA-Transfert Environnement, Narbonne-France. The 16S rRNA genes amplification and sequencing were carried out on the Illumina MiSeq platform. Finally, the sequencing data were classified into Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) to genus-level and expressed in percentage of their relative abundance.


2.5 Principal components analysis

A multivariable principal components analysis (PCA) was performed in order to correlate microbiological and physicochemical parameters using the software Statgraphics Centurion XV (Statpoint, Technologies, Inc. USA). Data obtained from both reactors at the beginning of stage I and at the end of stages II and IV were added to the multivariate matrix prior to data normalization.


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Acidogenic phase

Typical start-up conditions for fixed biomass reactors are based on a progressive increase of the OLR by means of HRT decrements while keeping the COD concentration constant. However, this strategy requires several months to reach a stable methanogenic ecosystem [20]. In this sense, the start-up procedure applied in this work allowed to achieve a stable methanogenic biofilm in short time periods [15]. In addition, the operational strategy allowed selecting the acidogenic population from the methanogenic biofilm in the A-reactor by means of pH control (pH = 5). It is worth to highlight that to the best of our knowledge, this start-up strategy has not been reported yet. On the other hand, it is known that decoupling the acidogenic and methanogenic phases of the anaerobic digestion process provides an enhanced stability of the biogas production process [8]. Furthermore, it also allows recovering hydrogen gas when a pretreatment is applied to the inoculum of the acidogenic reactor for inactivation of the methanogens [7,19]. Nonetheless, the latter was not addressed in the present work and therefore, no data of hydrogen production is reported (although, trace concentrations up to 3% were detected).

Table 1 shows the operating parameters recorded during the operation of the A-reactor. During stage I, 31 ± 7.6% of the organic matter contained in the tequila vinasses was removed, as a result, 4.4 ± 0.2 g-acetic acid L^−1 of VFAs were produced (∼3.0 g L^−1 of acetic acid and ∼1.7 g L^−1 of propionic acid). Then, total VFAs concentration in the effluent increased throughout the reactor operation (Fig. 2 b), resulting in lower COD removals (Fig. 2a). It is important to remark that only acetic and propionic acids were detected in the effluent of the A-reactor along the experimental runs. Interestingly, among days 154 and 180 (i.e. stage II) a sudden decrease on the acetic and propionic acids concentrations was observed down to ∼2.4 g L^−1 and ∼0.4 g L^−1, respectively (see Fig. 2b, expressing this drop as acetic acid). The later was presumably due to a change in the vinasses composition (i.e. lower VFAs concentration), since a new batch of vinasses was fed. The disturbance on vinasses composition simulates the typical variability in substrate composition at which full-scale reactors are subjected. Nevertheless, it is remarkable the robustness of the A-reactor for stabilizing the VFAs concentration at mean values reported in Table 1 (Fig. 2b).

Table 1 also shows that during the last operational stage of the A-reactor in which a constant HRT compared to stage III was applied but a higher COD vinasses concentration was fed (30 g L^−1), accumulation of acetic acid (∼5.8 g L^−1) was observed while propionate remained constant (∼1.8 g L^−1). In this sense, a strong microbial dynamics from stage II to IV was observed (Fig. 3 ), in which for instance bacteria from genus Prevotella was suppressed. Regarding biogas production, as expected only low production of methane was obtained (<2.0 L d^−1), indicating an effective development of the acidogenic bacteria biofilm and a low abundance of methanogenic Archaea. The latter was corroborated by the Archaea/Bacteria ratio obtained by Q-PCR, which reached a value of 3% at the end of stage II. In addition, the biogas production rate increased but the gas phase consisted mainly of carbon dioxide. In this sense, according to the relative abundance of the archaeal population (Fig. 3), also a strong dynamics from stage II to IV was observed, becoming dominant the acetotrophic genus Methanosaeta (formerly Methanothrix) with a relative abundance of 39.7% and decreasing the relative abundance of the hydrogenotrophic genus Methanobacterium, from 99.4% to 45.5% (Fig. 4 ).


3.2 Methanogenic phase

Table 1 shows the different OLRs (from 2.7–12 g-COD L^−1 d^−1) under which the performance of the M- reactor was tested (stage I to IV). Such OLRs were a consequence of the COD removal in the A-reactor and the working volume of the M-reactor. During stages I to III, a linear response in biogas production was observed, with methane content around 82% (Table 1). However, even when a linear increase in the biogas production was also noted at stage IV (up to 32.6 L d^−1) a slight decrease in methane content was detected (∼79%) which was correlated with a linear increase in the alkalinity factor (up to 0.5). Such factor is given by the ratio between the intermediate and partial alkalinities and has been reported to be an indicator of reactor acidification when values up to 0.3 are found in one-stage processes [21]. Even though acidification of methanogenic reactors has been previously reported by Méndez-Acosta et al. [2], this phenomenon has been experienced at lower OLRs (6 g-COD L^−1 d^−1), confirming the robustness of the two-stage process in PBRs for treating high OLRs.

Regarding VFAs production, Table 1 shows that during the first three stages, the concentration of propionic acid in the M-reactor was kept below inhibitory concentrations (0.9 g L^−1) [22]. However, in stage IV an increment to a concentration of 0.95 g L^−1 was observed. In this context, the acetic acid followed a similar trend, finding concentrations below 0.6 g L^−1 during the first three operational stages and a concentration up to 1.15 g L^−1 during stage IV. Such increments might be associated with the slight reduction in methane content of biogas (∼79%) and could act as a detrimental factor to the methanogenic Archaea. The latter was confirmed by the A/P ratio obtained by Q-PCR, which reached a value of 32% at the end of stage II and decreased to 1% at the end of stage IV, indicating that at such high OLR the methanogens are severely affected.

Fig. 3 also shows that during stages I and II, a high relative abundance of presumable propionate producers were found, such as the OTU belonging to the sequence VadinBC27 (∼12%) [18,23]. However, during the same stages, OTUs belonging to syntrophic genera, mainly Syntrophobacter, were detected at high relative abundance (∼26%). Some of these species are propionate consumers that catalyze the syntrophic conversion of propionate to acetate, carbon dioxide and hydrogen [23,24]. In this sense, syntrophism between acetogens and hydrogenotrophic (Methanobacterium and Methanocorpusculum) and acetotrophic (Methanosarcina and Methanosaeta) methanogens very likely occurred during the first stages of the M-reactor for the effective conversion of the organic matter into methane (biogas production ∼22.4 L d^−1with 82% of methane) [24–26].

On the other hand, during stage IV, the sequence VadinBC27 became subdominant while syntrophic bacteria decreased their relative abundance from 26.2% to 2.7%. Additionally, the acetotrophic methanogenic genera Methanosarcina and Methanosaeta that are usually associated with syntrophic genera during anaerobic digestion processes [9,27], decreased their relative abundance becoming subdominants. Apparently, during the last operational stage of the M-reactor, acetotrophic methanogens were very likely inhibited by the high acetic (1.15 g L^−1) and propionic (0.95 g L^−1) acid concentrations. Nonetheless, the hydrogenotrophic genus Methanobacterium drastically increased its relative abundance from 56.8% to 96.3%, suggesting that methane production during this stage occurred mainly through the carbon dioxide and hydrogen consumption pathway. It is important to highlight that despite the high VFAs concentration and that the COD removals decreased from 95.2 ± 1.2 to 74.1 ± 1.6% throughout the four stage, COD removals were higher than those previously reported for the two-stage anaerobic digestion of tequila vinasses in AnSBR and UASB reactors, 56–67% [19].


3.3 Overall performance of the two-stage process

Even though, the increases on the OLRs of the A-reactor promoted a slight accumulation of VFAs in the M-reactor, the results obtained in both reactors indicated a robust performance of the PBRs system. The biofilm configuration, which allowed retaining a high concentration of biomass, enabled the operation at an overall OLR up to 9.5 ± 1.4 g-COD L^−1 d^−1 (Table 2 ). Nevertheless, as it was previously mentioned, during the methanogenic phase the acetotrophic methanogenic populations were affected by the high acetic and propionic acid concentrations achieved during the last operational stage. Regardless of this detrimental effect, the biogas production trend was linear, achieving up to 1.35 L h^−1 and confirming the robustness of this configuration for treating high OLRs. It is worth noticing that, the start-up strategy used in this study favored the prevalence of acidogenic populations in the A-reactor biofilm, decreasing syntrophic bacteria and methanogenic populations. In addition, this strategy impacted the methanogenic reactor with an increase of methanogenic population diversity, which resulted in the robustness of the M-reactor. Accordingly, the methane yields obtained (∼0.29 L CH_4 g-COD^−1, STP) were higher than those reported in previous studies for the treatment of vinasses in UASB reactors (0.22 L CH_4 g-COD^−1, STP) [28] and similar to those obtained in AnSBR reactors (< 0.3 L-CH_4 g-COD_added ^−1) [9]. In addition, despite that an inverse correlation of the total COD removal and the OLRs was observed (Table 2), the removal efficiencies of the present study were comparable with those reported for the anaerobic digestion of tequila vinasses (85%) in AnSBR operated at lower OLRs [9]. Higher COD removals (90%) have been also reported in CSTR [2] but operated at lower OLRs (1–6 g-COD L^−1 d^−1) and higher HRT (> 6 d).

Regarding the two-stage process, the combination of packed-bed reactors allowed for higher COD removals in comparison with that reported for tequila vinasses [19] and similar to those reported for sugarcane vinasses [29] but at higher OLR (Table 3 ). In this sense, recently, an innovative fixed-film anaerobic reactor was applied to sugarcane vinasses, enhancing the methane production and COD removal; however, such study was performed under thermophilic conditions (55 °C) [30]. Therefore, the thermophilic digestion of tequila vinasses might be a research niche that could improve the environmental and economic sustainability of the tequila industry increasing the energy recovery.

Finally, PCA was used to predict capabilities of observed relationships, linking prokaryotic community characterization to two-stage reactor performance. PCA results indicated that the Principal Component 1 (PC1) accounted for 86.82% of the total variation observed while the PC2 explained 13.18% of the variation (Fig. 5 ). In this context, the overall operating variables associated to the microbial population dynamics data were correlated to elucidate the effect of the OLR applied during the process. According to PCs, the correlated variables formed 3 clusters named I, II and III. The cluster I, explained by the PC1, correlated the relative abundance of the hydrogenotrophic genus Methanobacterium (Mbac) in the M-reactor and the sequence of a presumed propionic acid producer VadinBC27 (VadinA) in the A-reactor with the OLR applied in the two-stage process (OLRs), the VFAs produced in the A-reactor (VFAacid), the biogas production rate in the M-reactor (BgasM) and the acetic (AcM) and propionic (PropM) acid concentrations in the M-reactor. Regarding the overall two-stage process, cluster I suggest that the high OLR applied (9.5 ± 1.4 g-COD L^−1 d^−1) favored an increase of propionic acid concentration toward methane production by the hydrogenotrophic pathway, represented by Methanobacterium. In this context, acetotrophic pathway could be inhibited by the high acetic acid concentration (1.15 ± 0.2 g L^−1) found during the stage IV. This hypothesis was confirmed by a decrease of the relative abundances of syntrophic genera of acetogens and acetotrophic methanogens as Methanosarcina and Methanosaeta, becoming subdominants in the M-reactor at the end of the process. On the other hand, Cluster II, also explained by the PC1, showed a correlation of the overall COD removal (CODrem) and methane content in biogas (CH4%met) with the relative abundances of fermentative genera Prevotella (Prevo) and Ruminococcaceae UCG-014 (Rumino) in the A-reactor. These fermentative populations are saccharoclastic Bacteria that produce succinate, lactate, acetate, ethanol, carbon dioxide and formate by fermentation [23]. Thus, this correlation suggested that the overall COD removal was associated to the dynamic of fermentative Bacteria populations toward substrates production for increasing methane content in biogas. Finally, cluster III that was explained by the PC2, correlated the methane yield (CH4Ymet) with the relative abundance of the acetogens belonged to syntrophic genera (Sgenera) and the acetotrophic genus Methanosaeta (Msaeta) in the M-reactor. This correlation suggests that methane yield was associated to acetate pathway, even if the acetic acid concentration had inhibitory levels, syntrophism could be remained active between syntrophic acetogens (Syntrophobacter, Syntrophomonas, and Syntrophus) and acetotrophic methanogens to produce methane [25]. This finding also reinforces the hypothesis that methane production was associated with the acetothrophic pathway at low VFAs concentration (stages I-III).


4 Conclusions

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first contribution regarding the use of fixed-growth reactors for two-stage anaerobic digestion. Results achieved in terms of biogas production (up to 1.35 L h^−1) and methane yield (∼0.29 L CH_4 g-COD^−1, STP) confirmed the potential of the packed-bed reactor configuration for high COD removals and energy recovery from high-strength wastewaters such as tequila vinasses. PCA analysis suggested the acetotrophic pathway as the main responsible for methane production at OLRs from 2.7 to 6.8 g-COD L^−1 d^−1, while hydrogenotrophic methane production pathway became dominant at OLRs higher than 12 g-COD L^−1 d^−1.