TITLE: Archaeal community dynamics and abiotic characteristics in a mesophilic anaerobic co-digestion process treating fruit and vegetable processing waste sludge with chopped fresh artichoke waste


1 Introduction

The processing of fruit and vegetables to produce finished consumable products (juices, cans, frozen fruits and vegetables) results in the generation of significant amounts of organic wastes (10–65% of the raw material) and sludge from waste water (2–8 tonnes sludge per 100 tonnes of processed raw material). Currently, such organic wastes are used as animal feed, or they are landfilled, although their use in landfill does not meet current legislation, as such organic wastes are highly biodegradable (Misi and Froster, 2001) and a source of nuisance in landfills (odour problems, atmospheric pollution with greenhouse gases) due to their high organic matter content. Fruit and vegetable processing waste and sludges are, however, suitable input materials for anaerobic digesters (AD), allowing the production of biogas, a renewable energy that helps to reduce dependency on fossil fuels and contributes positively to national economies (Mata-Alvarez et al., 2000).

Anaerobic digestion occurs via four main steps, namely hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis and methanogenesis (Demirel and Scherer, 2008). The anaerobic co-digestion of different wastes has been shown to enhance biogas production and result in a more efficient waste treatment (Mata-Alvarez et al., 2000; El-Mashada and Zhang, 2010), probably due to an improved nutrient ratio with mixed substrates and enhanced pH buffering capacity. Methanogens hold the key position in the anaerobic digestion process because it is in this last step of the process where the valuable methane is produced; for this reason, to maximise methane production and biogas yield, it is necessary to understand the pathway and to enhance the growth and activity of these key taxa.

Molecular techniques based on the comparative analysis of 16S rDNA sequences are currently standard tools in microbial ecology studies, and have allowed the discovery and quantification of many novel and non-culturable bacteria. Nucleic acid microarrays represent one of the most recent advances in molecular technologies, and allow a high-throughput format for the parallel detection of 16S rRNA genes from an environmental sample (Bodrossy and Sessitsch, 2004). The ANAEROCHIP microarray offers the possibility to analyse an entire array of methanogens concerning their presence or absence in a particular sludge sample in a single experiment (Franke-Whittle et al., 2009a). Microarray technology has also been applied and used successfully in other habitats and with different target microorganisms e.g. hypersaline cyanobacterial mats (Loy et al., 2002), soils (Small et al., 2001) and composts (Franke-Whittle et al., 2009b).

The aim of this work was to investigate the performance and biogas production of an AD reactor treating sludge from fruit and vegetable processing (artichoke and pepper) and supplemented with chopped fresh artichoke waste. Archaeal communities present in the anaerobic digester sludge at different times of the process were monitored using the ANAEROCHIP microarray, and quantified using real-time PCR.


2 Methods


2.1 Physical and chemical parameter analysis of sludge

Electrical conductivity (EC) and pH of sludge were measured directly with a micro conductivity metre GLP 32 (Crison, Alella, Spain) and micro pH metre GLP 21 (Crison, Alella, Spain), respectively. Total nitrogen was determined by the Kjeldahl method. Total organic carbon (TOC) was determined by the method described by Yeomans and Bremner (1989). Total solids (TS) and volatile solids (VS) were measured according to standard methods for examination of water and wastewater (APHA, 1995). VFA were measured by titration with H_2SO_4. VFA = (volume (ml) of H_2SO_4 from pH 5.0 to pH 4.4 × 1.66) ×500.


2.2 Reactor operation and sampling


2.2.1 Start-up

The experiment was performed using an anaerobic continuously stirred tank reactor (8–10 rpm) with 300 L working volume capacity. The reactor was initially charged with 215 L of mesophilic urban sewage sludge and 20 L sludge from a fruit and vegetable SBR (sequential batch reactor), and heated up to 35 °C. Table 1 shows the physico-chemical properties of the raw materials.


2.2.2 Single digestion process

The reactor was fed daily with 12 kg of sludge (fresh weight) from three fruit and vegetable processing plants (a canning company and two companies producing frozen artichoke and pepper) and an equivalent amount of effluent sludge was removed, corresponding to a hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 22.5 d.


2.2.3 Co-digestion

Once steady state conditions were achieved in the reactor, co-digestion of the fruit and vegetable processing sludge with chopped fresh artichoke waste (60/40) was started (55 d after the beginning of AD). The physico-chemical properties of the mixture are shown in Table 1. A flow rate of 11.75 kg d^−1 (fresh weight) corresponding to a hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 30 d, was used.

Gas production was quantified daily using a Milligascounter©1 (Ritter, Germany) located on the top of the reactor. Methane production was measured with a Multi Gas Monitor X-am 7000 (Dräger, Spain). Effluent sludge samples were collected at different times after the start of the process (0, 24, 30, 59 and 71 d) from a tap located at the bottom of the reactor.


2.3 DNA extraction

DNA was extracted from 200 mg of pelleted sludge material, obtained after the centrifugation of 1 ml of sludge for 20 min at 13,000 rpm, using the Fast DNA Spin Kit for soil (BIO 101, USA), following the manufacturer’s instructions. DNA was subjected to electrophoresis in 1.5% (w/v) agarose gels stained with ethidium bromide and visualised under UV light.


2.4 ANAEROCHIP microarray analysis

The 109F (5′-ACKGCTCAGTAAC ACGT-3′) and 934R (5′-GTGCTCCCCCGCCAATTCCT-3′) primers were used to amplify the 16S rRNA gene of methanogens in the sludge samples by PCR, as described by Franke-Whittle et al. (2009a). Single-stranded Cy5-labelled PCR product was generated using Lambda exonuclease and hybridised on ANAEROCHIP microarrays at 55 ^oC for 4 h. Arrays were washed after hybridisation, and a ScanArray Gx microarray scanner (Perkin Elmer, MA, USA) was used to scan hybridised microarray slides. The ScanArray Gx software (Perkin Elmer, MA, USA) was used to analyse fluorescent images, as described by Franke-Whittle et al. (2009a). For all spots, the median foreground and background signals were determined. The signal to noise ratio (SNR) for all spots was calculated using the following calculation: SNR = [I _p − (I _np − I _bnp)]/I _bp where I _p is median intensity of fluorescence of the probe, I _np is the median intensity of fluorescence of the nonbinding control probe, I _bnp is the median intensity of fluorescence of the background area around the nonbinding control probe, and I _bp is the median intensity of fluorescence of the background area around the probe. Signals were treated as positive if a SNR value of ⩾2 was obtained (Loy et al., 2002).


2.5 Real-time quantitative PCR

Sludge DNA extracted from samples was subjected to real-time PCR amplification with the genus-specific primers 240F (5′-CCTATCAGGTAGTAGTGGGTGTAAT-3′)/589R (5′-CCCGGAGGACTGACCAAA-3′) for Methanosarcina, and MS1b (5′-CCGGCCGGATAAGTCTCTTGA-3′)/SAE835R (5′-GACAACGGTCGCACCGTGGCC-3′) for Methanosaeta. Standard curves were constructed with PCR amplified 16S rRNA gene sequences from the pure cultures Methanosarcina barkeri (DSM 800) and Methanosaeta concilii (DSM 2139). For both curves, r ^2 = 0.999. Real-time PCR amplifications were performed using the Light Cycler System (Roche Applied Science) in a total volume of 10 μl, with each standard reaction mix containing 5 μl of Quantimix EASY SYB (Biotools, Spain), 0.5 mg ml^−1 BSA, 5 μM of each primer and 1 μl of 1/5 diluted DNA. Thermocycling was as follows: denaturation step of 30 s at 95 °C, followed by 40 cycles of 5 s at 95 °C, 25 s at 60 °C and 1 s at 80 °C. Runs were completed with a melting analysis (65–95 °C; ramp 0.1 °C/min). All samples were analysed in triplicate.


2.6 Statistical analysis

Statistical analyses of data were performed using the program SPSS 20.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). The graphical representation of chemical parameters was performed using a principal components analysis (PCA) for categorical data for parameters. PCA of the total signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) microarray data of the study was conducted using CANOCO for windows 4.5.


3 Results and discussion

Fig. 1 shows accumulative biogas production (L kg^−1 dry matter) where biogas production increased during the course of anaerobic digestion. When only the sludge from fruit and vegetable processing was used as input material (first 55 d of experiment), the average biogas production reached 244 ± 88 L kg^−1 dry matter d^−1. After the addition of freshly chopped artichoke waste (day 55), an average value of 354 ± 68 L kg^−1 dry matter d^−1 biogas was obtained. The increase of biogas production was also accompanied by an increase on the obtained biogas in methane ranging from 42.0% to 65.0% during the first phase of digestion with only the single substrate, and reaching higher values (more than 70%) with the co-digestion of substrates. These results support the findings of other authors who have performed anaerobic co-digestion experiments with other input materials (Goberna et al., 2010; Ashekuzzaman and Poulsen, 2011). The quality of biogas is directly related to the methane concentration; the biogas produced in the process had a minimum of 40% methane, but once the process was stable, it reached approximately 65% which is an acceptable quality. The increase in biogas production and methane content corresponded with a reduction in volatile solids (Fig. 2 ) which is attributed to well-functioning methanogens, scavenging the organic acids formed by acidogenic bacteria.

AD is considered a complex process, because it involves four rate-limiting steps, hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis and methanogenesis (Demirel and Scherer, 2008). Each group of microorganisms involved in these stages has an optimum set of conditions for growth, including pH range, VFA/alkalinity ratio, C/N ratio and temperature. Neutral pH values (7.0–7.5) were observed for the duration of this experiment, indicating stable digester conditions. At neutral pH values, both acidogenic and methanogenic microorganisms can grow and function well, resulting in optimal methane production (Alvarez et al., 2004). The VFA/alkalinity ratio of sludge samples is shown in Fig. 2, and indicated process feasibility. During the first phase of AD, the VFA/alkalinity ratio ranged from 0.2 to 0.3, values suitable for the optimal functioning of the digester. However, after 30 d, ratios reached values close to 0.7, due to a temporary increase of VFA (Fig. 3 ) and a drop in pH. Significant VFA production can reportedly inhibit AD (Nordberg et al., 2007), and the VFA/alkalinity value of 0.7, close to the threshold value of 0.8, indicated a potential imminent failure of the digester (Zhao and Viraraghavan, 2004). In order to prevent this, the buffering capacity of the medium was increased by the addition of sodium bicarbonate to the digester, and values close to 0.3, and rising to 0.5 after the addition of chopped fresh artichoke waste were obtained. This imbalance may have been due to an organic overload, or the presence of an inhibitor of methanogenesis, thus causing an imbalance between the production and consumption of volatile fatty acids, and resulting in an accumulation of volatile fatty acids and a subsequent decrease in pH and acidification of the reactor.

According to Sievers and Brune (1978), the optimal range of C/N substrate used was far from the optimal range of 25–30. During the AD process, organic nitrogen is hydrolysed to produce ammonium. Ammoniacal nitrogen is an important nutrient for microbial growth (Bryant et al., 1971), and a deficiency of it can result in a failure to produce gas, and an excessively high concentration of it may limit microbial growth. There is much variation in the literature regarding the concentration of ammonium which can inhibit AD processes (Chen et al., 2008). The results of this study however indicate that the increasing ammonium levels throughout the digestion process did not inhibit biogas production in the digester, (Figs. 1 and 2).

Fig. 4 shows a principal component analysis (PCA) of physical and chemical data. The two principal components extracted from the PCA for categorical data explained 93% of the total variance. Samples from the start of the digestion process (day 0) are located near high VS and high pH, while, samples collected towards the end of the process (day 59 and 71) clustered near high levels of methane, ammonium, biogas production, VFA/Alk and TS. This grouping would appear to be a response of the changed input material (mixed fruit and vegetable sludge plus chopped fresh artichoke waste) to the bioreactor.

The archaeal community structure present in reactor samples was investigated using the ANAEROCHIP microarray (Franke-Whittle et al., 2009a). Microarrays allow the determination of the presence or absence of an entire array of microorganisms in a particular sludge sample in a single experiment. Microarray data should be treated as semi-quantitative, due to the use of PCR in the amplification of environmental DNA, which can result in a disproportionate amplification of certain microorganisms, as well as the inherent differences in hybridisation efficiencies of different oligonucleotide probes (Wagner et al., 2007). The SNR values provide an estimate of the abundance of a target (Cho and Tiedje, 2002). The SNRs obtained after hybridisation of samples on the ANAEROCHIP microarray were determined and are shown in Table 2 , where they showed changes in archaeal communities during the experiment. Signals above the detection limit were obtained for the Methanosaeta probes Msae 841, Msae 827 and Msae 406 in the 0 day samples, while two of the three Methanosaeta probes (Msae 827 and Msae 406) yielded positive signals for the day 24 and day 30 samples. Methanosaeta was virtually not detected in the day 59 and day 70 samples. In contrast, the five Methanosarcina probes (Msar 184, Msar 197, Msar 549, Msar 587 and Msar 601) gave high SNR values in the day 59 and day 70 samples, and nearly no SNR values in the earlier sludge samples. Also of interest was the disappearance of Methanoculleus over the course of the experiment. PCA of archaeal community showed the samples to be divided in two clusters, one containing samples from days 0 to 30, and the other containing samples from days 59 to 71 (Fig. 5 ). The strict acetotrophic genus Methanosaeta and the hydrogenotrophic genus Methanoculleus dominated samples from the first phase of the process (days 0, 24 and 30), and the facultative acetoclastic genus Methanosarcina dominated samples from the second phase of the process (sampling time 59 and 71 d).

Other methanogens detected in only one of the three replicates under investigation included the methanol-consuming genus Methanosphaera, the hydrogenotrophic genera Methanospirillum and Methanothermobacter. This could indicate a potentially metabolically diverse methanogenic community comprised of organisms capable of methane formation during the anaerobic digestion process. The finding of these archaea however in only one replicate of various samples, indicates some heterogeneity amongst archaeal communities in the different DNA extracts, a not unexpected result.

The VFA concentration has been reported to be closely related to the dissolved hydrogen concentration (Schink, 1997), and the growth of Methanoculleus species is known to be optimal at low hydrogen concentrations. The appearance of Methanoculleus species in the initial phases of anaerobic digestion was also described by Goberna et al. (2009), and the co-existence of aceticlastic and hydrogenotrophic methanogens, as was found in this study, has been reported in a thermophilic anaerobic digestion (Hori et al., 2006) and in natural environmental ecosystems, e.g. rice fields (Lueders and Friedrich, 2002).

According to Patil et al. (2010), Methanosarcina and Methanosaeta are genera found to be dominant in sludge samples collected from mesophilic AD processes. Both genera are comprised of acetoclastic methanogens, which have been reported to be responsible for approximately 70% of the methane produced in biogas reactors (Ahring et al., 1995). The important methane precursors utilised by methanogens are acetate and H_2/CO_2 (Garrity and Holt, 2001). The genus Methanosaeta belongs to the family Methanosaetaceae and includes exclusively acetotrophic species which utilise acetate as a sole substrate for energy metabolism. These organisms grow only at low acetate concentrations, whereas Methanosarcina species are known to dominate in high acetate environments (Conrad and Klose, 2006). However, Methanosaeta holds a competitive advantage over Methanosarcina spp. because of its 5–10 times higher substrate affinity. This higher substrate affinity is based on a high energy input in the activation of acetate by an acetyl-CoA synthetase (Kendall and Boone, 2006). Due to the results of sludge sample DNA hybridisation with the ANAEROCHIP microarray, these genera were chosen for further investigation using real-time quantitative PCR (Fig 6 ). The number of Methanosaeta gene copies detected by real-time PCR did not vary considerably throughout the process (8.5–9.0 log copies 16S rRNA g^−1 dry sludge^−1). These results contrast those found with the ANAEROCHIP array, where Methanosaeta was found in the day 0, 24 and 30 samples, but was not detected in the day 59 and day 71 samples. On the other hand, significantly higher numbers of gene copies of Methanosarcina were found in the second phase of the anaerobic co-digestion process (from 9.0 log copies 16S rRNA g^−1 dry sludge^−1 on day 59 to 12.0 log copies 16S rRNA g^−1 dry sludge^−1 on day 71) than in the first phase (9.0–9.50 log copies 16S rRNA g^−1 dry sludge^−1). These real-time PCR results indicate that during the second phase of the process, archaea of the genus Methanosarcina easily adapted to the new environmental conditions (the incorporation of fruit and vegetable sludge plus chopped fresh artichoke waste), began to dominate, and were most likely responsible for the enhanced methane production, although the actions of other microorganisms cannot be dismissed without further study. The real-time PCR results support the results of the microarray analysis, whereby Methanosarcina was not detected in the day 0, 24 and 30 samples, but was detected, and thus present in higher numbers, in the day 59 and 71 samples. The competitive advantage of Methanosarcina under conditions of non-stable system has been previously reported (e.g. McMahon et al., 2004). It has also been widely realised that Methanosarcina species form multicellular aggregates which can easily adhere to solid substances such as cellulosic materials and may thus be offered resistance to inhibiting substances in the reactor (Vavilin et al., 2008). They can directly produce methane from acetate that has been derived from the fermentation of solid organic matter. Methanosarcina is seemingly more resistant to increases in acetate concentration and thus promotes a more stable digestion process (Conklin et al., 2006). According to De Vrieze et al. (2012), the ratio of Methanosarcina to Methanosaeta in reactors appears to be even more important than total archaeal numbers in monitoring reactor operational stability.


4 Conclusions

This paper has demonstrated that the mesophilic co-digestion of sludge generated from the processing of fruit and vegetable waste (artichoke and pepper) with chopped fresh artichoke waste can be optimised and used to obtain a high and good quality biogas production. The results provide evidence that acetoclastic methanogenesis, principally by Methanosarcina, could be the main pathway for methane production.