TITLE: New approach to control the methanogenic reactor of a two-phase anaerobic digestion system


1 Introduction

Anaerobic digestion is the preferred degradation process for wastewater with high organic loadings, especially when pretreatment down to chemical oxygen demand (COD) levels of municipal wastewater is sufficient. For certain types of industrial wastewater with easily degradable ingredients and little variations in composition, e.g. from sugar and other food industries, anaerobic processes are well established on an industrial scale [1]. However, for wastewater with dynamic alterations in organic loadings and/or compositions, process stability has been a bottleneck for the application of anaerobic operation plants. Therefore, there is a need for the development of sophisticated process management and control algorithms when complex wastewater is to be purified, e.g. wastewater from textile finishing industry [2]. In most of the control systems applied for the control of wastewater reactors the volumetric feed rate is the only manipulated variable being applicable.

Due to the variety of inhibitory substances, the online measurement of the inhibitor itself is almost impossible. Thus, the development of an advanced monitoring and control system is necessary for a competitive operating system. Various strategies have been developed for single-stage anaerobic digestion processes [3–6]. In contrast, concepts for two-phase systems are not available yet. The proposed control strategy is based on the separation of the degradation process into the two phases, acidogenesis and methanogenesis. By this, the main part of the organic loading at the input of the methanogenic step consists of volatile fatty acids (VFA), mostly acetic, propionic and butyric acid. The actual composition depends on the influent of the acidogenic phase and the conditions (residence time, pH value) in the corresponding reactor. Great shifts in the relative content of a certain acid are not very likely to occur if principally the same type of wastewater is treated all the time. Furthermore, it will be demonstrated in this paper that the influence of the acid distribution is insignificant with respect to the feasibility of the control strategy.

The aim of the experimental part of the study is the test of the new control approach in the presence of inhibitory substances and with changing substrate concentrations. In experiments with a synthetic substrate and high concentrations of sodium chloride as model inhibitor the feasibility of the proposed strategy will be investigated. Results are shown for an experiment with substrate concentration ramps and for an experiment with sodium chloride as inhibitor.


2 New approach

Fig. 1 shows the principle of the new approach with the main signal fluxes. The measurement of the VFA effluent concentration of the methanogenic reactor is not obligatory in our concept. Reactor 1 and the storage tank can be regarded as a single unit, because only volume (level) control is considered. The degradation processes in reactor 1 (acidic phase bioreactor) is treated as a process optimization and not a control problem because of the limited possibilities of applying promising control techniques to this reactor.

One crucial benefit of the two-phase design is getting a measurable information on the input into the methanogenic step of the degradation process: It is possible to determine the total concentration of VFA (substrates) c _TFA,in which is the input disturbance variable into the system. With the knowledge of this total substrate concentration and the carbon content of each substrate, a carbon mass balance of the methanogenic step, which in many cases is rate limiting for the whole process, can be obtained. This is due to the fact that the conversion reactions in the methanogenic phase are (from a chemical point of view) clearly defined. Thus an overall fractional yield Y_M/S ^∗ of methane can be derived.

The reactions that are dominant in the methanogenic system are: Under the (reasonable) assumption that no enrichment of H_2 occurs in the system, as long as no inhibition takes place, the following two overall reactions (R5 and R6) for the degradation of propionic and butyric acid result. In other words, the H_2 formed from VFA in reaction R1 or in reaction R2, respectively, is completely consumed in reaction R4. Then, the individual fractional yields of methane (Y _M/S ^(i)) on the dominant VFAs are as follows: 0.5C-mole CH_4 per C-mole acetate, 0.583C-mole CH_4 per C-mole propionate, 0.625C-mole CH_4 per C-mole butyrate (Table 1). The overall fractional yield Y_M/S ^∗ is obtained by multiplication of the individual fractional yield Y _M/S ^(i) of each acid with the fraction (w ^(i)) of the corresponding acid in the influent (based on mole carbon), and summing up over all (three) acids:The biomass yield coefficient Y _X/S ^(i) takes into account that a certain part of the organic carbon is incorporated into the biomass and is not available for the formation of the product (methane). These yield coefficients are computed from values given in literature [7] and are shown in Table 1.

Table 1 demonstrates the influence of different acid distributions on the overall fractional yield. It can be seen that this influence is not very high. For this reason, the individual acid contents do not have to be measured online: Yet, it might be beneficial, to determine them offline from time to time, when the type (composition) of wastewater principally changes. However, the resulting error is small when this is not done. So, neither complex measurements, e.g. with GC–MS systems, nor expensive online determination of TOC (or COD) is necessary in our concept. Simple online titration of VFA as described elsewhere [8] is used instead. With the stoichiometric information of the overall conversion reactions a methane production rate is obtained being maximal in the following sense: the methane production rate resulting when highest conversion ξ _max from VFA to methane is achieved under conditions without inhibition. This value normally is known from experience or determined in experiments.

The product of the overall fractional yield Y_M/S ^∗ of methane and the maximal conversion ξ _max provides for the maximal overall methane yield. The product of this maximal overall methane yield and the total loading of VFA in the influent yields the (searched) maximal methane production rate expected q_M ^∗ when no inhibition occurs (reference methane production). Without consideration of any delay this reference methane production can be computed in the following way:The total influent concentration of volatile fatty acids c _TFA,in (mol carbon per liter) is derived from the one obtained from titration c _VFA,in (mol acid equivalents per liter) by multiplying the acid concentration measured with the carbon contents of each VFA weighted by the relative acid contents in the influent (based on mol acid equivalents, i.e. not the same values as the w ^(i) values!).

Taking into account the delay between measurement and formation, the reference methane production q_M ^∗ is calculated as a first-order delay with the delay time constant t _g,del in the system (also known from experiments):In order to compare the reference methane production q_M ^∗ with the methane production measured q _M, two further assumptions are required. Firstly, the methane produced is transferred (almost) completely into the gas phase, which is reasonable because of the very low solubility of methane in water. Secondly, the transformation from mass flow to volumetric flow is calculated with the ideal gas law. Comparing the methane production measured with the expected one enables an identification of a potentially reduced biological activity caused by any inhibitory substance. This approach can be used for monitoring purposes and renders superfluous an analytical determination of the inhibitor itself.

The principal use of the methane production rate as a monitoring variable comprises two further advantages: On the one hand (compared to the production rate of total biogas), a diminished susceptibility to disturbances, which are caused by varying carbonate oversaturation, is achieved. On the other hand, because of the low solubility of methane in water a fast system response is gained. For this reason efforts have been made to use the methane production not only as a monitoring but also as a control variable (i.e. within a feedback system) [3,5]


3 Control system

In contrast to strategies which utilize the methane production itself as a control variable [3,9] in our concept the ratio between the methane production rates measured and expected provides the control variable η.By these, a compensation of the inhibitory disturbance, which can be assumed to be multiplicative, is achieved. That way, the idea of Internal Model Control [10], which is well qualified for the elimination of additive disturbances, has been transferred to this application. Besides, if maximal conversion ξ _max is close to 1,η is a good approximation for conversion, and can be seen as an efficiency parameter.

The concept was successfully tested with a controller based on a PI algorithm according to the following control law:The operation point (Q _O,η _O) is not fixed at a specific point but is adapted as a function of the influent concentration. The following empirical function relates η _0 to the influent concentration using the fit parameter κ: (κ<1, c_N=1 mmol l ^−1):For extremely diluted wastewater (e.g. at concentrations of c_TFA,in<3 mmol l ^−1), the supervisory expert system sets the fed flow rate instead of the controller. As typical for a PI structure of the controller, the proportional part (K _P) moves the system fast towards the (temporary) operation point, whereas the integral part (K _I) corrects for the offset. The numerical values for this constants can be estimated according to the general considerations for the setting of controller parameters and the following values were found to be appropriate K _P=0.5 and K_I=0.34 h ^−1 [11]. The numerical parameter κ (Eq. (6)) was determined in curve fits and a value of 0.6 was used in all experiments [11]. Q _O is chosen with respect to the minimum solid retention time in the reactor. It is determined in the beginning from the maximal conversion rate in kinetic experiments (or kinetic data from a reactor operation without inhibitor). For the cause of the experiments (or reactor operation), Q _O is continuously re-evaluated as described below.


3.1 Improved strategy

For reasons of better performance in situations where a stabilization of the system at low flow rates occurs, the control algorithm was augmented in the following way: The operation point moves not only as a function of the influent concentration but also depending on the maximal degradative capacity of the system. The flow rate Q _O is increased as long as the deviation between actual and reference methane production is positive and greater than a benchmark (e.g. 5%) for a certain time period (e.g. 10^∗t_g,del). This is to enable the system to move into a state with maximal achievable flow rate, and thus running the reactor at loadings as high as possible. This kind of implementation is allowed as long as the system dynamic is sufficiently slower than the controller dynamic. It is feasible because in a certain operational range the control variable is not very sensitive to changes of the flow rate (which actually means the system is badly controllable).


3.2 Supervisory expert system

As shown in Fig. 1, the control system of the methane reactor is embedded into an expert system which enables the level control of a storage tank and the handling of extraordinary situations. This is implemented with a switch to preset values of the manipulated variable (flow rate) depending on the output of a look-up table depending on the operational conditions of the individual plant. Within the look-up table as many cases as required from operational experience can be defined. The combination of the different cases is identified by a binary number. For each binary number a reasonable value for the flow rate is set. Some examples for such kind of cases are:• Storage tank is empty (low level reached) or full (high level reached), • Shock situation (sudden drop of methane production), • VFA influent concentration too low (diluted wastewater or no proper acidification).


4 Materials and methods


4.1 Bioreactor system, data acquisition and reactor control

Fig. 2 shows the bioreactor and the control system. The fluidized bed bioreactor (1.6 l) was filled with 500 ml Siran (Schott, Mainz, Germany) carrier material. It was operated at 40°C and heated by an external water bath. The pH value was maintained at 7.0 by an independent control circuit. VFA were measured online by titration without sample preparation as described elsewhere [8]. The sampling (Dosino 700; Liquino 711; Metrohm, Herisau, Switzerland) and titration unit (719 Set Titrino, Metrohm) for VFA determination were connected to the PC via the RS 232 interface using the two standard serial interfaces of the PC (Dell Optiplex DX 1, Windows NT 4.0 operation system). The gas meter (modified Wohlgroth, Zürich, Switzerland; modified by an incremental encoder for angle recording, CP-350 series, Pewatron, Wallisellen, Switzerland) and an infrared methane sensor (Polytron IR, Dräger, Lübeck, Germany) were connected to a multi purpose input–output card (MIO 16E-4, National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA). The proposed controller changes the rate of the feed pump using an analogue output of this card. The software data acquisition and control system as described above was implemented using Labview 5.1 (National Instruments) as programming language. The average time for one sampling, analyzing and calculation cycle (titration of the VFA in the reactor and the influent, gas measurement) was about 45 min (depending on the duration of the titration).


4.2 Analytical methods

Titration results were counterchecked by the off-line determination of VFA with gas chromatography (GC) analysis (5890 Series, Hewlett Packard, Palo Alto, USA, FID-detector). Samples were filtered (0.45 μm syringe filter, Sartorius, Göttingen, Germany) and stored at 4°C before the GC measurements.


4.3 Substances

Unless mentioned otherwise, the reactor was fed with a synthetic substrate containing 3 g l ^−1 acetic acid and 1.5 g l ^−1 propionic acid dissolved in mineral salt medium (hence the c _TFA of the standard medium was 1929 mg C l ^−1). The mineral salt medium contained in mg l ^−1: NH _4 Cl 0.6, KH _2 PO _4 250, CaCl _2·2H _2 O 60, MgCl _2·6H _2 O 60, FeSO _4·7H _2 O 40 and a trace element solution as described in von Sachs [11]. The pH value of the feed was adjusted to about 6. The biomass in this reactor originated from various sources (industrial and municipal digester) and was adapted to the medium described above in about 2 years of the operation.


5 Result


5.1 Halotolerance of the mixed culture and response to changing NaCl contents

The halotolerance of the mixed culture was investigated in continuous experiments with increasing salt (NaCl) contents. Sodium chloride was chosen as inhibitor in order to enable a recovery from inhibitory conditions within a few hours. Fig. 3 shows the response of the degradation system to a switch of the feed NaCl concentration from 0 to 25 g l ^−1 in the standard mineral salt medium (and later back to NaCl-free feed). After reaching steady-state conditions (after about 30 h of experimental time) the methane production rate was reduced by 54%. The conversion rate dropped from 340 to 155 mg C l ^−1 h ^−1. After about 40 h the VFA degradation increased very slowly, probably due to a preferential growth of halotolerant microorganisms.


5.2 Test of the control strategy

The new approach to control the methanogenic reactor of a two-phase anaerobic digestion system was tested in two relevant and exemplary situations:(a) Changing substrate (VFA) concentration in the reactor influent. The reactor was exposed to sharply falling and rising influent concentrations. (b) Changing concentrations of an inhibitory substance.


5.2.1 Response to changing substrate (VFA) concentrations

To investigate the response to changing substrate concentrations, the VFA concentration in the reservoir was constantly lowered by diluting the reservoir with mineral salt medium without VFA (starting after 3 h of feed with 6 g l ^−1 acetic acid and 3 g l ^−1 propionic acid). The feed VFA concentration was increased after 32 h of operation to a mineral salt medium containing 3 g l ^−1 acetic acid and 1.5 g l ^−1 propionic acid. Fig. 4 shows the course of dilution rate D (D=volumetric flow rate of feed/reactor volume), measured and expected methane production rates q _M and q_M ^∗, as well as the influent and effluent VFA concentrations (in part additionally measured with GC). The controller responds quickly to decreasing influent concentrations (7–32 h in the experiment) and increases the dilution rate by approximately 50% (from about 0.11 to 0.17 h ^−1). During this period the measured methane production rate q _M matches the expected q_M ^∗. The same applies to q _M and q_M ^∗ during the following increase of the VFA concentration. Two brief disturbances occurred during this experiment but after the correction of the defects the controller soon achieved process stability again (28 h: gas measurement disturbance; 42–46 h: partial clogging of the sampling tube/feed supply). However, it can be derived that the disturbance caused an increase of the dilution rate. In the following 30 h the dilution rate was not increased as q _M matches the expected q_M ^∗. Although the methane production rate was lower compared to the start of the experiment, the controller did not increase the dilution rate (because q _M matches the expected q_M ^∗). For further investigations (see below), therefore, the “improved strategy” was enabled during the experiment


5.2.2 Response to changing concentrations of an inhibitory substance

The degradation system was exposed to higher (inhibitory) concentrations of NaCl due to a switch to a feed containing 15 g l ^−1 sodium chloride (for operation without NaCl see Fig. 4). The standard influent VFA concentration was not changed during this experiment (3 g l ^−1 acetic and 1.5 g l ^−1 propionic acid) (Fig. 5). In the time period from approximately 50–70 h the reactor reached a steady state (Fig. 5). The VFA concentration in the reactor was about 3.5 mmol l ^−1 (insignificantly increased compared to the start of the experiment), while the controller reduced the dilution rate by 21% to 0.143 h ^−1 (compared to the initial dilution rate with inhibitor-free feed). Expected and measured methane production rate matched well during the entire period. After 70 h the NaCl concentration in the feed was raised to 25 g l ^−1. In response, the controller lowered the dilution rate to about 0.07 h ^−1. During this period the VFA feed concentration was reduced by about 2 3 in the bioreactor. Between the 122th and 130th hour of the experiment the gas phase measurement was disturbed. Therefore, the steady state at the higher salt concentration was shorter, but still well detectable. From 130 h on the reactor was fed again with standard medium without inhibitor in order to investigate the recovery of the controlled degradation system. Two phases can be distinguished during the operation with inhibitor-free feed. In the time period between the 130th and the 230th hour of the experiment the automatic increase of the dilution rate in the control algorithms (as long as the control error was in an appropriate band width) was disabled (see section on the “improved strategy” in the introduction). In this period the reactor was stabilized, but at a low degradation rate. At the 230 h the automatic increase (as long as the control error was in an appropriate band width) was again enabled and the system increased the dilution rate (starting after about 260 h) by a constant rate (0.006 h ^−1). Due to this improved control strategy the dilution was increased until after about 300 h a stable dilution rate of about 0.17 h ^−1 was obtained again.

After 230 h a new lot of inhibitor-free feed was used. The slight bias to smaller influent concentration between the 125th and the 230th hour was caused by minor pre-degradation in the non-sterilized but only cooled feed tank during stand alone operation.


6 Discussion


6.1 Control system

According to the concept described above the methane production rate expected is calculated under the following assumptions:1. The maximal conversion of VFA in the methanogenic step is known for situations without inhibition. 2. The content of suspended solids and the concentration of dissolved organic substances which are convertible to methane in the methane reactor are not much time varying. 3. Hydrogen (reduction equivalents) is the limiting substrate for conversion without inhibition (i.e. does not accumulate in the system under normal conditions). Provided that biomass is settled after the acidogenic step and retention time in the first phase is high enough that acidification is almost completed, the first two assumptions are easily met. In cases were other intermediates like alcohols are observed in higher concentrations, a calibration curve relating VFA and total intermediate concentration may be required. The third condition normally is fulfilled when the portion of hydrogenotrophic methanogenes in the biomass is sufficient. This is a prerequisite for an adequate operation and therefore can be taken for granted.

As mentioned above, the ratio of the two methane production rates yields the efficiency parameter η. Using this ratio as the control variable not only provides for stability of the process with respect to inhibition but also automatically enables good control performance without inhibition. An additional online measurement of the effluent total VFA concentration would allow for an adaptive recalibration of the reference system for the non-inhibitory case (adaptation of Y_M/S ^∗). With this extension of the control system an adaptive controller could be gained.


6.2 Test of the control system

Lunze and Riedel [12] listed two major requirements for the successful development of future control strategies of anaerobic digesters: (a) “The bacterial interactions and the dynamic dependence of the degradation rates on environmental factors have to be better understood” and (b) “reliable cheap sensors for the measurements in the liquid and in the solid phase have to available”. In this respect, the proposed control system is a major step forward for the control of two-phase anaerobic digestion plants. Regarding (a): The knowledge on bacterial interactions was not even necessary for the proposed control of the methanogenic reactor, as it is not important for the secure operation of the controlled system what kind of bacterial interactions caused the observed inhibition. Regarding (b): The online titration of the volatile fatty acids [8] is such a demanded cheap and reliable method for measurements in the liquid phase that apart from a minor incident (partial clogging of the sampling tube) no disturbances have been observed. The main advantage is that this method requires no (costly to maintain) separation of the biomass (filtration or similar). The VFA concentrations determined by titration were in good agreement with those measured offline by gas chromatography. Requirement (b) was fulfilled for the liquid phase using the titration method.


6.3 Test of the control strategy: response to changing substrate (VFA) concentrations

The dilution rate of the methanogenic reactor was successfully adapted to the influent concentration by the proposed controller. Both sharply falling and rising influent concentrations could be managed using the proposed control algorithms. The introduction of an automatic increase of the dilution rate as long as the controller error is below a threshold allowed a fast increase of the dilution rate (until the conversion rate in the system reaches the maximal conversion rate). A stable degradation at high conversion rates could be reached fast even after a disturbance in the measurement system. The presented data demonstrate the feasibility of controlled operation of the methanogenic reactor in industries with rapidly changing wastewater (VFA) concentrations.


6.4 Test of the control strategy: response to changing concentrations of an inhibitory substance

The system response to varying salt concentrations without control was determined in additional experiments (see “Halotolerance”) and will now be compared to the system behavior in an experiment using the proposed controller. The (steady-state) inhibition by sodium chloride at a concentration level of 25 g l ^−1 results in a methane production rate reduced by 54% (Fig. 3), equivalent to a drop of the conversion rate from 340 to 155 mg C l ^−1 h ^−1. In the controlled case this reduction causes the controller to decrease the dilution rate until the input loading rate re-equals the degradation rate of the organisms, almost at the same level (150 mg C l ^−1 h ^−1) as in the uncontrolled case (i.e. the controller detects the reasonable set-point). Furthermore, in the controlled case the effluent concentration did not increase due to the lower dilution rate set by the controller.

Concerning the system recovery it was found that the system was stabilized, but not at the same dilution rate as reached without inhibition (Fig. 4). This is due to the fact that without inhibition the sensitivity of the control variable with respect to the dilution rate is not very high. Little changes in the degradation capacity of the bacteria and/or certain inaccuracies in the measurements may lead to different dilution rates for the same set-point. This does not necessarily have to be seen as a drawback because the main function of the control algorithm is the handling of the inhibition state. However, an additional set-point trajectory is implemented for the case that the control system is locally stabilized at an operation point which may be non-optimal regarding the degradation efficiency (improved strategy). That means the dilution rate is increased as long as the given band width for the control error is not left, and thus the operation point (corresponding with a conversion rate of 340 mg C l ^−1 h ^−1), before starting the salt dosage, was achieved. With this procedure an optimal operation point was found.


6.5 Comparison to other control strategies for anaerobic digesters

Two-phase anaerobic digestion systems are generally viewed as a possibility to increase the process stability [13], just as process control is another way to increase the process stability [12]. For complex wastewater (which is of frequently changing composition and may contain inhibitory substances) a combined strategy, two-phase anaerobic digestion with process control, is an adequate approach to reach sufficient process stability. However, most control systems are not developed for the methanogenic reactor of a two-phase system (but for single-stage systems; evaluated in [3]) or with very different control aims [14]. Therefore, a comparison to other control strategy is only partly feasible. The advantage of the proposed control strategy is that it is based on a limited number (3) of simple and reliable online measurements. This is in contrast to other strategies that employ more advanced (and complex) equipment for online analysis (e.g. gas chromatography). Another example for such control strategies is the use of a guard reactor, e.g. the Rantox^® system [4]. In this case the guard reactor must be fully controlled itself and additionally defined pulses of acetic acid must be added. Furthermore, the interpretation of the data might be complex due to the different biomasses (and biomass contents) present in guard and full-scale reactor. A control strategy that could be adapted for two-phase system as presented here is the compensation control [5]. It uses mainly the methane production rate of the plant and some knowledge about the wastewater composition (methane yield). Unfortunately, this strategy cannot be applied to wastewater with rapidly changing composition and inhibitory substances and hence a direct comparison again was not feasible. From this discussion it can be derived that there is a need to develop concepts for the process control in two-phase systems and the proposed system is a promising concept to bridge this gap.


7 Conclusions

A new approach for monitoring and control of the two-phase anaerobic digestion process with inhibitory substances was presented and successfully applied. Its main idea is the use of online titration of the influent VFA into the methanogenic phase. The proposed control technique proved to be very reliable in the experiments and required only a minimum amount of maintenance. A prediction of the methane production rate expected was possible from the titration data at all influent concentrations of VFA, and by comparison with the actual methane production rate an early indication of inhibition was achieved. Within the proposed PI control algorithm this information was successfully used to manipulate the feed rate into the reactor. The feed rate was decreased at increasing inhibitor concentrations to match the lower capacity of the degradation system in the presence of the inhibitor and later again increased at decreasing inhibitor concentrations. It was not necessary to identify the inhibitor or to measure the inhibitor concentration itself. These results confirm that the use of the proposed strategy is a promising way for the control of the treatment of wastewater containing any inhibitory substance in two-phase systems.