TITLE: Biogas production from wheat straw in batch and UASB reactors: The roles of pretreatment and seaweed hydrolysate as a co-substrate


1 Introduction

The objective of the European Commission on Renewable Energy Road Map is to increase the gross domestic energy consumption from renewable energy sources, which amounted to 12.4% in the EU in 2010 (EurObserv’ER, 2011), to 20% by 2020. Sweden, however, already produces about 30% of its total energy from renewable sources, due to its large renewable energy assets and an active engagement in energy policies (Swedish Energy Agency, 2011). Biogas currently contributes 0.4% (3 TWh/year) of energy consumed in Sweden, and this could be increased to 74 TWh/year by using natural waste and forest residues. The use of new biomass resources, improved process technology, and energy, agricultural, environmental and waste-handling policies that promote sustainable development (Lantz et al., 2007) are all important to maximise the use of the energy bound in biomass resources and to attain the goal that have been set.

Biogas production can be increased by using abundant lignocellulose materials such as agricultural and forest residues (Zeng et al., 2007). However, the complex lignocellulose structure limits the accessibility of the sugars in cellulose and hemicellulose. This means that pretreatment is necessary to gain access to the sugars bound in lignocellulose, and several efficient pretreatment methods for lignocellulose material have been developed (Alvira et al., 2010). One example of such a method is steam pretreatment in the presence of dilute acid, which results to efficient lignocellulose hydrolysis and sterilisation. Building a steam pretreatment unit requires a huge initial investment, and the operation of such a plant consumes energy. Both of these factors are major drawbacks. However, process integration with other heat and power plants that produce waste heat, and the use of heat exchangers in the processing steps can substantially reduce the requirement for energy input (Ljunggren and Zacchi, 2010). Today, there are many operational demonstration ethanol plants that employ steam pretreatment and enzyme hydrolysis techniques for lignocellulose degradation (Gnansounou, 2010). The use of sulphuric acid during steam pretreatment in the presence of dilute acid is another drawback. Pretreatment is very efficient when sulphuric acid is used, but the acid creates problems downstream due to high sulphate concentrations. These can compromise methane production as a result of competition between sulphate-reducing bacteria (SRB) and methanogens. Moreover, biogas produced in this way and subsequently upgraded to be used as a transport fuel would contain high concentration of H_2S, which is corrosive to engines. We have here used phosphoric acid as an alternative to sulphuric acid, hence avoiding the problems of high downstream sulphate concentration.

It has been reported that celluclast enzymes, which hydrolyse polymers to release sugars after steam pretreatment, increase the cost of producing biofuel due to low efficiency and the high purchase costs of the enzymes. More efficient enzymes are now being produced by several companies, and we have here used a new and more efficient celluclast enzyme (Cellic C Htech from Novozyme, Denmark).

Poor buffer and nutrient content of wheat straw is a further hindrance to the use of this material in a biogas process. Co-digestion is a common method used to remedy nutrient deficiency and poor buffer capacity in biogas reactors, through the synergistic effects that co-digestion can introduce. Treatment of wheat straw hydrolysate with manure improves the performance of the upflow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) technique (Kaparaju et al., 2009). As manure becomes scarce due to its increasing use in biogas production, other co-substrates will be required. Seaweed generally has a high nutrient content, and is an underexplored marine resource. The seaweed Ulva lactuca was not suitable for combustion for energy production due to the high ash content (Bruhn et al., 2011). In addition, U. lactuca is alkaline, and this means that it can be used as a buffer in biogas reactors. Seaweed hydrolysate has been used in a UASB reactor at a high OLR, 20.6 g tCOD/l.day, without adding nutrients or alkaline agents (Nkemka and Murto, 2010).

The work presented here has evaluated dilute acid catalysed steam pretreatment and enzyme hydrolysis of wheat straw and subsequent biogas production in batch and continuous UASB processes. The investigation has evaluated the pretreatment of wheat straw and the effect of pretreatment on the methane potential in batch tests on several starting materials: wheat straw (pieces of lengths 1–2 cm), ground wheat straw, dilute acid catalysed steam pretreatment of wheat straw, and such pretreated wheat straw subsequently hydrolysed by enzymes. We have also evaluated whether wheat straw hydrolysate is suitable for methane production in a UASB reactor. Finally, we have examined the use of seaweed hydrolysate as a co-substrate in the treatment of wheat straw hydrolysate in a UASB reactor.


2 Methods


2.1 Wheat straw

Wheat straw was collected from a farm in Lunnarp, Sweden, and was harvested in August 2009. It had a total solid (TS) content of 96%, of which 94% was volatile solids (VS). The wheat straw was cut with a grinding mill (Retsch GmbH, Germany), and sieved through a Vibro-screen (SWG Process Engineering Ltd., England) to obtain pieces of lengths 1–2 cm. The material was stored at room temperature until use. Table 1 presents the composition of the wheat straw.

The wheat straw was pretreated by steam pretreatment using an acid catalyst, followed by enzymatic hydrolysis. The resulting material was separated into a liquid fraction and a solid fraction. Fig. 1 shows the pretreatment process, and Sections 2.2 and 2.3 will describe the pretreatment conditions.


2.2 Acid catalysed steam pretreatment of wheat straw

Ten kilogrammes of wheat straw (in pieces of lengths 1–2 cm) was pre-soaked for one hour in 0.5% H_3PO_4 of TS. In a pre-trial, steam pretreatment of straw with 0.2% phosphoric acid was not efficient and as such, the acid concentration was increased to 0.5%. The material was then pressed in batches for about 2 min at 3.0 × 10^7 Pa using a press (Tinkturenpressen HP5 M, Fischer Maschinenfabrik, Germany). The pressed wheat straw was subsequently steam pretreated in a pilot-scale reactor of volume 10 l at 190 °C for 5 min, in batches of 0.7 kg. The procedure used for the steam pretreatment has been previously described (Linde et al., 2008).


2.3 Enzymatic hydrolysis of pretreated wheat straw

The steam-pretreated wheat straw was then enzymatically hydrolysed using the celluclast enzyme Cellic C Htech (95 FPU/g, 590 IU β-glucosidase/g enzyme) (Novozyme, Denmark). The amount of enzyme added to the steam-pretreated wheat straw was calculated by assuming a content of water insoluble solids (WIS) of 10%, and a desired enzyme load of 15 FPU/g WIS. The hydrolysis was performed at 50 °C for 72 h in a reactor of volume 45 l, with continuous stirring. The active reactor volume was 25 l. Two batches of enzymatic hydrolysis were performed. The pH of the steam-pretreated material was adjusted to about 4.8 with 50% NaOH before the enzymatic hydrolysis, since this is the optimal pH for the activity of Cellic C Htech. The slurry obtained from enzymatic hydrolysis was centrifuged (Jouan Centrifugeurs, Switzerland) and then filtered through Munktel filter paper grade 5.

Samples for methane potential measurements were taken after each processing step and stored at −20 °C until use (Fig. 1).


2.4 Methane potential batch tests

The inoculum used in the batch tests was collected from a mesophilic full-scale biogas plant, Söderåsens Bioenergi AB, Sweden, co-digesting industrial food waste and energy crops. The total solid content of the inoculum was 3.7%, of which 63.9% was volatile solids. Methane potential tests were performed on the fractions (A to D-S) from the process steps shown in Fig. 1. All tests were performed in triplicate and under mesophilic conditions (37 °C). The experiment was performed during 31 days except for the ground and cut wheat straws, which were digested further for 127 days. Avicel cellulose (crystalline cellulose) was used as a control to assess the cellulase activity of the inoculum, and the methane potential of the celluclast enzyme Cellic C Htech was also determined. The inoculum:substrate ratio was 2:1, based on VS content. The experimental set-up has been previously described (Kreuger et al., 2010). Air-tight bags used for biogas collection were produced from the aluminium packaging material transofoil (Flextrus AB, Sweden). The volume and composition of the gas produced were measured and the temperature recorded during the experiment.


2.5 Methane production in UASB reactors

The wheat straw hydrolysate (D-L) was treated in duplicate in UASB reactors. Granular anaerobic sludge was obtained from a mesophilic full-scale plant in the Netherlands and used as inoculum in the UASB reactors. The TS content of the granular sludge was 6.4%, the VS content was 43.5% of TS, and the reactors were initially loaded with 250 g of the granules. The UASB reactors had an active liquid volume of 0.8 l and were operated under mesophilic (37 °C) conditions as previously described (Nkemka and Murto, 2010). A modified anaerobic basic nutrient solution was used to dilute the wheat straw hydrolysate as previously reported (Angelidaki et al., 2009). Urea (100 kg/m^3) was used instead of ammonium chloride in the basic anaerobic medium. Urea is a cheap source of nitrogen and is also a buffering species.

Methane production and the treatment capacity were determined by increasing the feedstock concentration and by decreasing the hydraulic retention time (HRT). The organic loading rate (OLR) was increased by first increasing the concentration of the feedstock from 10.0, 19.3, 27.7 and finally to 47.7 kg COD/m^3 (where “COD” is an abbreviation for “chemical oxygen demand”) at a constant HRT of about 8 days. The increase in the feedstock concentration corresponded to an increase in OLR of 1.2–6.1 kg COD/m^3.d (Table 3). The next stage of the increase in OLR was a decrease in the HRT from 8.0 to 2.7 days, carried out when the concentration of the feedstock was 27.7 kg COD/m^3. This corresponded to an increase in the OLR from 3.5 to 10.4 kg COD/m^3.d. The total treatment period was 145 days.

The wheat straw hydrolysate was also treated by co-digestion with seaweed hydrolysate (SWH) (in a ratio of 1:1 based on kg COD/m^3), instead of adding the anaerobic basic medium as previously described. The OLR was increased by increasing the concentration of the mixed hydrolysates from 9.5 to 18.4 kg COD/m^3, which corresponds to an increase in the OLR from 3.6 to 6.6 kg COD/m^3.d at a constant HRT of 2.7 days. The total treatment time was 47 days. The seaweed hydrolysate was produced by seaweed hydrolysis, described in Section 2.6.

The processes were allowed to run for at least three times the HRT at each OLR level, to reach a semi-steady state condition. The composition, temperature and volume of the gas produced were monitored during the experiments, as were the levels of ammonium-nitrogen, COD, pH and the concentration of volatile fatty acids (VFA).


2.6 Production of seaweed hydrolysate from seaweed

The seaweed used to produce leachate was collected from the beach at Trelleborg, on the southern coast of Sweden in May 2008. The TS level was 22.3%, of which 32.9% was VS. The seaweed was ground to produce pieces sized 2 to 3 cm, which were stored at −20 °C until use. Seaweed leachate was produced by hydrolysing the seaweed using four Schott bottles of volume 5 l as hydrolytic reactors and were placed in a ventilated hood. At the start of the hydrolysis, 6.3 kg of seaweed and 6.3 kg of water were added to the four reactors. No inoculum was added and the hydrolysis depended on the natural bacterial floral of the seaweed (Nkemka and Murto, 2010). Consequently, only the buffer and nutrient contribution from the seaweed can be evaluated in the co-digestion of seaweed and the straw hydrolysate in the UASB reactor. The reactors were operated at 37 °C for 12 days. The leachate was subsequently filtered through a sieve of mesh size 125 μm to remove sand and other large particles. The pH of the leachate was 5.76, and it contained 0.21 kg/m^3 NH_4–N, 2.78 kg/m^3 total alkalinity (TA), and 26.4 kg/m^3 COD. The leachate (SWH) was subsequently used as a co-substrate during methane production in batch tests and in UASB reactors.


2.7 Analytical methods

TS and VS were analysed using standard methods (APHA, 1998). Dr. Lange test kits LCK 114 or LCK 914 were used for COD analyses and the analyses were carried out in a Lasa 100 spectrometer (Dr. Bruno Lange GmbH, Germany). Analyses of NH 4 + – N, partial (PA) and total alkalinity, pH, gas volume and gas composition were carried out as previously reported (Nkemka and Murto, 2010; Parawira et al., 2006). Acetic acid, ethanol, formic acid, furfural, hydroxylmethyl furfural (HMF), lactic acid and sugars were analysed after the pretreatment using a high-performance liquid chromatograph (HPLC) (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) equipped with a refractive index detector (Shimadzu) and as previously reported (Linde et al., 2008). Samples for VFA determination in the effluent of the UASB reactors were analysed by HPLC (Jasco, Tokyo, Japan) and as earlier reported (Kreuger et al., 2011). The elemental analyses presented in Table 2 were performed by LMI AB, Helsingborg, Sweden. Levels of nitrogen and carbon were determined and used to determine the C/N ratio. Levels of Fe, Al, B, Cu, P, S, Zn, Mn, Na, Mg, Ca, K and Si were determined by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES). Levels of Mo, Cr, W, Se, Ni, Cd, Co, As, Hg and Pb were determined by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). Levels of total organic carbon (TOC) and Kjedahl-nitrogen (kJ-N) in the liquid samples were determined. Methane volumes were corrected to 0 °C and 1 atm.


2.8 Statistical analyses

The effects of the pretreatment on the methane yield in the batch tests were analysed using the statistical software SPSS 16.0. Univariate analyses of variance and post hoc (Tukey) tests were performed, and 95% confidence intervals determined.


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Wheat straw composition

Table 1 presents the sugar and lignin contents of the wheat straw, which were in the same range as previously reported (Linde et al., 2008).


3.2 Acid catalysed steam pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis of wheat straw

Steam pretreatment in the presence of dilute H_3PO_4 followed by enzymatic hydrolysis using the celluclast enzyme Cellic C Htech was an efficient pretreatment of the wheat straw (Table 1). The yield of d-glucose was 35.2 g/100 g TS and the yield of xylose was 21.4 g/100 g TS. The total sugar yield was 95%, and the yield of d-glucose was 95% and that of xylose was 94% of the theoretical yield. The result of this study was comparable to the total sugar yield obtained following steam pretreatment/enzymatic hydrolysis with 0.2% H_2SO_4 at 190 °C for 5 min (Linde et al., 2008). Hence, steam pretreatment with an acid catalyst gave a high sugar yield. Sulphuric acid is an efficient acid catalyst for the steam pretreatment of lignocellulose materials. However, as earlier mentioned, the high concentration of SO 4 2 - ions in the hydrolysate in a biogas reactor can be problematic in the subsequent biogas process. SRB compete with methanogens for H_2 and use organic carbon, which may further reduce the methane potential of the material. Furthermore, H_2S produced under anaerobic conditions can be toxic to methanogens at neutral pH and can precipitate valuable micronutrients that are needed for anaerobic digestion (Hulshoff Pol et al., 1998). We have used H_3PO_4 acid in the steam pretreatment, as a novel method to circumvent these problems. We have also used a more efficient enzyme in the enzymatic hydrolysis than those previously used, Cellic C Htech (95 FPU/g enzyme), and this contributed to the efficient release of sugars. It was possible to obtain high sugar yields with the enzyme that was commonly previously used, Celluclast 1.5 L (60.9 FPU/g enzyme), but larger amounts were required due to its low specific activity (Sipos et al., 2010). Enzymes are expensive, and the use of small amounts of an efficient enzyme can reduce the process cost.

Other compounds, such as acetic acid, ethanol, formic acid and lactic acid, were produced in small amounts during the steam pretreatment in the presence of dilute acid/enzymatic hydrolysis. Furthermore, furfural and HMF, both of which may inhibit methanogens, formed during the steam pretreatment. The concentration of furfural that inhibits methanogens ranges from 2.4 to 3.0 kg/m^3 (Raj, 2009). The hydrolysate produced by the pretreatment, however, must be diluted before digestion in a methane reactor due to its high COD content, and this reduces the risk of furfural inhibiting the methanogens. In addition, Torry-Smith et al. (2003) have reported that furfural and HMF are degraded in UASB reactors.

The pH of the hydrolysate was low, 4.41, and treatment of the hydrolysate for biogas production required pH adjustment to a neutral range. The COD content was 196 kg/m^3, which was higher than the sum (123.8 kg/m^3) of all the compounds present in the D-L fraction. This shows that other compounds were present in the hydrolysate that were not identified and that could contribute to methane production. The TS content of the liquid hydrolysate, D-L, was 13.3% and the VS content was 98.2% of TS. This liquid hydrolysate is suitable for anaerobic digestion in a continuous stirred tank (CSTR) reactor since a TS concentration of about 10% is required for processing in a CSTR. Alternatively, the hydrolysate may be treated in a methane high-rate reactor, which allows higher rates of methane production, and we evaluated this process.


3.3 Mass flow and nutrient variation during steam pretreatment and enzyme hydrolysis

Variation in the total mass during the pretreatment process was caused mainly by the addition of process water (Fig. 1). Estimation of the volume of process water needed is important for subsequent cost estimations. Water is added in the process at various stages, such as soaking the wheat straw in dilute H_3PO_4, as steam during the steam pretreatment, and during the enzymatic hydrolysis. Water is, on the other hand, lost during the pressing step prior to steam pretreatment. This resulted in the loss of organic matter in process steps B (9.00 kg VS) and C (8.42 kg VS) that could have been used for methane production. In addition, 10.13 l of water was lost or evaporated during the enzymatic hydrolysis (50 °C for 72 h), and volatile compounds that may contribute to the methane potential were also lost at this stage. Moreover, other volatile compounds would have been lost during steam pretreatment: it was difficult to account for these losses in the present study.

The C/N ratio is an important macronutrient parameter in achieving stable anaerobic digestion. The C/N ratio varied during the pretreatment (Table 3 ), and the final ratio obtained with wheat straw, 47.7, was higher than the value of about 25 that is suitable for anaerobic digestion (Bouallagui et al., 2009). In contrast, the C/N ratio of the D-L fraction, 20.1, was low due to the enzyme addition, and this fraction was suitable for methane production. The wheat straw contained low concentrations of certain micronutrients (Fe, Mo, W, Se, Ni and Co) that are necessary for anaerobic digestion (Hinken et al., 2008; Schattauer et al., 2011), and the concentrations of these nutrients became much lower due to dilution with process water. Hence, it was necessary to add these nutrients to achieve a more balanced anaerobic process.

The concentrations of Mg (620 mg/l), Si (1100 mg/l), K (4400 mg/l) and Ca (2200 mg/l) ions were high in the wheat straw, and these ions, together with carbonate, are components of ash. The carbonates of these ions are important as they provide the buffer capacity that is needed in a biogas reactor. In a previous study, the high ash content of the seaweed U. lactuca gave a high alkalinity in the reaction vessel (Bruhn et al., 2011). The ash component in the present study, however, was lost during the soaking and pressing steps before steam pretreatment. The amounts of nutrients lost were determined from the metal ion concentrations (Table 2) and the volume changes that occurred due to the addition of process water (Fig. 1). In large-scale steam pretreatment in the presence of dilute acid, spraying of phosphoric acid may be preferred to soaking, since the latter requires a large vessel and large volumes of water.

The concentration of sodium ions in the wheat straw was low, 170 mg/l. This is to be compared with the range 3,000–16,000 mg/l that is required to inhibit the anaerobic digestion process by 50%, in the absence of other nutrients or salts (Feijoo et al., 1995). The concentration of sodium, however, increased during pH adjustment in the enzymatic hydrolysis step, and its concentration in the D-L fraction was 1,200 mg/l. The concentrations of metals that are toxic to anaerobic digestion were generally low in the D-L fraction. Some metals, however, are toxic in a very narrow range of concentration. The toxicity of a metal, further, depends on several factors, such as metal bioavailability, synergy, and antagonism with other metal ions (Chen et al., 2008).

The nutrient contents of the wheat straw hydrolysate D-L, 196 kg COD/m^3, and of the seaweed hydrolysate (SWH), 26.4 kg COD/m^3, are compared to the anaerobic nutrient requirements (Table 3). The SWH contained a high concentration of Fe (17.0 mg/l) and of other micronutrients, such as Mo, Se, Ni, and Co, that are needed for anaerobic digestion. The SWH also contained high concentrations of Mg and Ca, which can combine with carbonate to provide buffer capacity during the anaerobic digestion of the hydrolysate. High concentrations of heavy metals, in contrast, might inhibit the anaerobic process. The concentration of sulphate ions was high when using SWH as a co-substrate, which is another major drawback of using SWH. The high sulphate concentration may lead to a high concentration of SRB, which has a negative effect on methane production, as earlier mentioned. Co-digestion of D-L and SWH can reduce the sulphate concentration and in this way lead to a stable anaerobic process. The anaerobic digestion of wheat straw hydrolysate, therefore, requires nutrients and alkalising agents to be added, or digestion with a suitable co-substrate, in order to achieve stable operation.


3.4 Methane potential batch tests

The methane yields obtained in batch tests after 31 days of digestion (except otherwise stated) were determined. Fig. 2 presents the methane yields of the different materials after the processing steps (processes A to D-S). Volatile compounds in the liquid samples from the processing steps have been included when calculating methane yields. It has been reported that volatile compounds evaporate when measuring TS and VS by oven drying, leading to overestimation of the methane yields (Kreuger et al., 2011).

The methane yield from wheat straw pieces of length 1–2 cm (process B) was 0.18 m^3/kg VS_added. Grinding wheat straw into a powder (process A) did not result in a significant (p > 0.05) improvement in the methane yield, 0.21 m^3/kg VS_added. Steam pretreatment in the presence of dilute acid of the wheat straw (process C) resulted in a 39% increase (p < 0.05) in the methane yield to 0.25 m^3/kg VS_added. The methane yield increased further, by 57% from baseline to 0.28 m^3/kg VS_added, (p < 0.01) following steam pretreatment in the presence of dilute acid and enzymatic hydrolysis (process D). The biodegradability and rate of methane production from the materials produced in processes C and D were higher than those of processes A and B. This was reflected in that about 90% of the methane was produced after 17 days in processes C and D. Material from processes A and B was digested for 127 days and the methane yields were 0.31 m^3/kg VS_added for process A (“A-127 days” in Fig. 2) and 0.28 m^3/kg VS_added for process B (results not shown). The methane yield obtained from wheat straw in the present study was similar to that reported by Dererie et al. (2011). The slow rate of methane production from the material after processes A and B was expected, since wheat straw contains lignocellulose, which degrades slowly. Steam pretreatment in the presence of dilute acid and enzymatic hydrolysis have a significant effect on the biodegradability, and thus also the rate of methane production. This effect has been earlier reported for lignocellulose hemp (Kreuger et al., 2010).

The methane yield from the liquid fraction (D-L) was 0.32 m^3/kg VS_added (0.27 m^3/kg COD_added). This value was as expected, since the fraction contained easily hydrolysable sugars and soluble organic substances (Section 3.2). This confirms that treatment by steam and dilute acid followed by enzymatic hydrolysis is efficient. The rate of methane production was high, and about 95% of the methane had been produced after 17 days. The methane yield from the solid fraction (D-S) was 0.14 m^3/kg VS_added, which was higher than expected. The solid fraction contained lignin, which degrades slowly. However, some sugars would have been trapped in the slurry after the separation, and these contributed to the methane potential. Therefore, digestion of the process fractions C and D may give a high methane production. We suggest that the D-S process fraction should be washed in a large-scale process in order to recover the remaining organic substances from the solid fraction. These substances can be useful for methane production. The liquid process fraction D-L can be used to produce methane in high-rate methane reactors, enabling in this way faster treatment. We have investigated this idea further.

The inoculum possessed cellulase activity, as was shown by the fact that the methane yield from avicel cellulose, 0.37 m^3/kg VS_added, was about 89% of the theoretical yield (0.415 m^3/kg VS_added). The methane potential of the celluclast enzyme was 0.12 m^3/kg VS_added after 31 days, and 0.29 m^3/kg VS_added after 59 days. About 90% of the methane was produced between days 20 and 59. We suspected that ammonia was inhibiting the process as the NH 4 + – N concentration was high in the inoculum, and it was 4.8 kg/m^3 at a pH of 8.28 after 31 days of digestion. Mineralisation of the protein (celluclast enzyme) caused the increase in the concentration of NH 4 + – N. More experiments are needed to investigate the inhibition of the digestion by the celluclast enzyme during the methane potential batch test. It may be possible to use another source of inoculum to obtain inoculum that contains a low concentration of NH 4 + – N. The pattern of methane production achieved when the celluclast enzyme is used allows us to deduce that most of the enzyme flows through a methane high-rate reactor untreated, due to the short operational HRTs of 2–4 days. Hence, the contribution of the enzyme to the methane potential of the entire process would be low in such a reactor. We estimated that the energy potential of the enzyme added during the work presented here was 1.6–4.1% of the energy content of the wheat straw (16.3 MJ/kg TS). A previous study reported that adding a different enzyme, Celluclast 1.5 L from Novozyme, contributed to the overall energy yield (Kreuger et al., 2010).

The methane potential of wheat straw was lower than the methane potentials of milk and fully ripened maize (0.27–0.37 m^3/kg VS), which are most often used for biogas production (Amon et al., 2007). However, steam pretreatment in the presence of dilute acid of lignocellulose crop residues such as wheat straw, followed by enzymatic hydrolysis, can result in comparable methane potentials.


3.5 Energy yields of batch methane production from wheat straw

Fig. 3 presents the energy yields from biogas from the materials, taking into account the material losses from the different processing pretreatment steps (A to D-L). The lower heating value (LHV) of the sugar fraction of wheat straw dry matter (TS) was 16.3 MJ/kg TS: the rest of the energy is contained in the lignin fraction. The use of cut wheat straw (process B) and powdered wheat straw (process A) gave similar energy yields: 7.8 and 9.2 MJ/kg TS, respectively. Higher energy yields were obtained from the material after process C, 10.7 MJ/kg TS, and after process D, 11.9 MJ/kg TS, than those obtained after processes A and B. Digestion of the wheat straw for 127 days (“A-127” in Fig. 3) resulted in a high energy yield of 13.6 MJ/kg TS. Steam pretreatment in the presence of dilute acid and enzymatic hydrolysis gave significantly higher energy yields, and the pretreatment method can be recommended for wheat straw.

Anaerobic digestion of the solid residue (D-S), which contained mainly lignin, gave an unexpectedly high energy yield of 2.5 MJ/kg TS. Soluble compounds trapped in the solid fraction may be the cause of this. It is difficult to degrade lignin under anaerobic conditions, and the energy potential of the D-S fraction was therefore added to the energy potential of the D-L fraction. The lignin may, as an alternative, be combusted to produce heat and electricity, in which case the estimated energy yield from lignin is 4.2 MJ/kg TS. The energy produced can then supplement the heat and power for the biogas process.

Material losses occurred during the processing steps, especially in processes C, D and D-L and these losses resulted in lower energy yields. Material was lost in process C in the form of organic compounds during the soaking and pressing steps and during the steam pretreatment step, as mentioned in Section 3.3. The material loss in process D may have been due to evaporation of volatile compounds during the enzymatic hydrolysis. Further material was lost in the separation process that gave materials D-L and D-S. It is clearly crucial to minimise material losses during the processing steps in order to harness as much as possible of the energy bound in the wheat straw.


3.6 Methane production from wheat straw hydrolysate in UASB reactors

There were early signs of process failure when the wheat straw hydrolysate (D-L) was treated in a UASB reactor without adding nutrients or buffer. The pH decreased from 7.17 to 6.21 at an OLR of 1.68 kg COD/m^3.d after 10 days of treatment (data not shown). It was evident that it was necessary to supplement the hydrolysate with nutrients and buffering agents, and these were added with the anaerobic basic medium described in Section 2.5.

Table 3 presents the results of treating the D-L fraction in the UASB reactors. The COD concentration of the D-L increased from 10.0 to 47.7 kg/m^3, and the concentration of total monomeric sugars from 5.46 to 26.03 kg/m^3. Adding nutrients and buffering agents to the anaerobic basic medium resulted in an increase in the pH of the hydrolysate from 4.14 to 7.01–7.14, which is suitable for methane production (Gerardi, 2003).

The methane production rate (MPR) from the D-L fraction increased from 0.32 to 2.70 m^3/m^3.d when the OLR increased from 1.2 to 10.4 kg COD/m^3.d. The methane yield, in contrast, decreased from 0.30 to 0.26 m^3/kg COD as the OLR was increased. This is approximately the same methane yield as that obtained in the methane potential batch test, 0.27 m^3/kg COD. Organic material may be washed out at very short HRTs and high OLRs, since the microbes have less time to convert the organic compounds into biogas. The methane content of biogas ranged from 49% to 55% during the entire treatment period. Kaparaju et al. (2009) have reported a similar methane yield from the treatment of wheat straw hydrolysate in a UASB reactor: 0.27 m^3/kg COD at an OLR of 2.8 kg COD/m^3.d. In the present study, the energy yield decreased from 11.56 to 10.02 MJ/kg TS as the OLR increased. The energy yield obtained when the D-L fraction was treated in the UASB reactor was comparable also to the batch methane potentials. The high MPR achieved at an OLR of 10.4 kg COD/m^3.d may result in a high rate of energy production, in which case the treatment of the D-L fraction in a high-rate UASB reactor is beneficial. We have obtained methane and energy yields similar to those of Kaparaju et al. (2009), and one factor in this is the treatment efficiency of granular anaerobic sludge in the treatment of diluted waste streams. Further, the methanogens (which are more sensitive than acidogens) are protected inside the granules while the acidogens are concentrated around the periphery of the granules (Torry-Smith et al., 2003).

Treatment of the D-L fraction in the UASB reactors was performed under stable operation conditions. Evidence for this comes from stability of the pH, which ranged from 7.26 to 7.47 in the period during which the OLR was increased. This neutral pH is suitable for anaerobic digestion. The COD concentration in the effluent was low, and ranged from 0.37 to 1.08 kg/m^3 when the OLR was increased from 1.2 to 10.4 kg COD/m^3.d, corresponding to a reduction in COD that ranged from 94% to 95%. Torry-Smith et al. (2003) reported that the COD decreased to 84% at an OLR of 14 kg COD/m^3.d when treating lignocellulose effluent formed during ethanol production in a UASB reactor. The PA in the UASB reactor was maintained at a high level, as required, during the treatment period, and ranged from 2.4 to 7.5 kg/m^3, while the NH 4 + – N concentration ranged from 0.38 to 1.04 kg/m^3. The OLR was initially increased from 1.2 to 6.1 kg COD/m^3.d by increasing the concentration of the feedstock. The OLR was further increased by decreasing the HRT from 8.0 to 2.7 days, which increased the OLR from 6.1 to 10.4 kg COD/m^3.d. The reason for this increase was to maintain a low concentration of NH 4 + – N in the reactor: this concentration decreased from 1.04 kg/m^3 to 0.7 kg/m^3 due to the increase in the OLR. Ammonia inhibition can be avoided by maintaining a concentration of NH 4 + – N lower than 1 kg/m^3 and a concentration of free ammonia lower than 0.05 kg/m^3. However, Calli et al. (2005) have reported that UASB granular sludge can adapt to high levels of NH 4 + – N (1–6 kg/m^3) after long-term treatment. It is also possible to lower the concentration of NH 4 + – N by reducing the concentration of urea. Sodium hydrogen carbonate and urea were the main buffer compounds in the anaerobic basic medium: urea is a cheap source of nitrogen and buffer compound, the use of which can reduce operating costs.

The concentration of VFAs was below 0.2 kg/m^3 during the treatment of the D-L hydrolysate, and the VFAs consisted mainly of acetic and propionic acids. A VFA concentration lower than 0.1 kg/m^3 has been reported at an OLR of about 10 kg COD/m^3.d in a UASB reactor used to treat VFAs and alcohol produced from the dark fermentation of food waste (Han et al., 2005). Furthermore, increase in the OLR results in the accumulation of VFAs in the reactor. Murto et al. (2004) have reported well-functioning biogas processes in manure treatment with high VFA concentrations, where a high buffering capacity in the reactor ensured satisfactory function. We have controlled the buffer capacity by adjusting the feedstock, which enabled the UASB reactor to be operated at a much higher OLR. Other difficulties that prevent UASB reactors achieving very high OLRs are granule shearing and granule bed disruption due to vigorous gas production, which may eventually lead to process failure (Mahmoud et al., 2003).

The granular bed in the reactor grew, and the level of granules in the UASB reactor increased from 8.4 to 27.4 g VS during the treatment period. Efficient biomass growth allowed sugars and VFAs to be degraded at the high OLR of 10.4 kg COD/m^3.d.


3.7 Methane production from wheat straw and seaweed hydrolysate in UASB reactors

The mixture of wheat straw (D-L) and seaweed hydrolysate (SWH) (1:1 based on kg COD/m^3) was co-digested in a UASB reactor without addition of the anaerobic basic medium.

Methane production from the mixture of D-L and SWH in the UASB was rapid, with an MPR that ranged from 0.82 to 1.47 m^3/m^3.d. The OLR increased from 3.6 to 6.6 kg COD/m^3.d (Table 3). The methane yield, 0.22 m^3/kg COD, remained almost constant as the OLR increased. The methane yield obtained from the co-digestion of D-L and SWH in the UASB reactors was similar to that obtained in the methane potential batch test. It has recently been reported that synergistic effects arise that improve batch methane yields from seaweed (Saccharina latissima) pretreated with steam at 210 °C for 10 min and wheat straw (Vivekanand et al., 2012). The methane yield was 0.241 m^3/kg VS for a seaweed:straw ratio of 50:50, and 0.270 m^3/kg VS when the ratio was 75:25 (Vivekanand et al., 2012). We have obtained a methane yield of 0.19 m^3/kg VS from the treatment of SWH alone, at an OLR of 8.1 kg COD/m^3.d, with an MPR of 1.38 m^3/m^3.day (Nkemka and Murto, 2010). Treatment of wheat straw and seaweed hydrolysate may improve methane productivity and yield, and further studies are required to determine optimum mixture ratios.

The pH increased slightly during co-digestion of D-L and SWH, from 4.14 to lie in the range 5.50–5.79 in the mixed liquid hydrolysates. The mixture of hydrolysates, however, contained some alkalinity that was contributed from the SWH, even though the pH was low. The inherent total alkalinity of the SWH was 2.78 kg/m^3, while that of D-L was almost zero.

Treatment of the mixture of D-L and SWH in the UASB reactors was highly stable. The pH in the reactor was about 6.9, which is within the range recommended for anaerobic digestion (Gerardi, 2003). The COD concentrations in the effluent were low and the reduction in COD was comparable to that obtained in the treatment of the D-L hydrolysate. The PA was lower than that obtained during the treatment of the D-L in the UASB reactor, since no buffering compounds were added. The VFA/PA ratio is an important parameter used to assess the stability of anaerobic digesters, with a recommended range of 0.07–0.08 (Gerardi, 2003). A ratio greater than 0.5 shows that the process is imbalanced and that the process may fail. The VFA/PA ratio in this study was 0.01, well below the recommended range. This indicates that the process was stable, and that the inherent alkalinity of the SWH was sufficient. We conclude that the co-digestion of D-L and SWH in a UASB reactor is a viable process that makes it avoids the addition of nutrients or buffering agents and may be important in the reduction of the operational costs.

Combustion is a simpler and faster method of producing energy from wheat straw than anaerobic digestion. It suffers, however, from several disadvantages: problems with ash disposal, emission of NOx, and corrosion in the boilers due to the high KCl content of straw. Anaerobic digestion, in contrast, allows nutrients of the wheat straw digestate to be recycled to farmland as fertiliser. Competition between use for food and use for biofuel production is also avoided. Furthermore, biofuel produced from cheap lignocellulose raw material can compete more readily with fossil fuel. In Sweden, the lowest CO_2 emissions are achieved when short-rotation forest, straw and forest residues are used to produce renewable energy (Börjesson, 1996). Hence, increasing the share of renewable fuel in the transport sector that comes from wheat straw may have a significant effect in reducing greenhouse gas emission.

Producing multiple biofuels (ethanol, hydrogen and methane) is a recent trend in the production of biofuels. Such co-production ensures the efficient utilisation of the energy content of biomass (Dererie et al., 2011; Kreuger et al., 2010). Further benefits of multiple fuel production are the production of high-value fuels and chemicals, energy security, and stability (both for the environment and for society). The high operating cost of multiple fuel production, however, may be a limitation. A techno-economic analysis that compared the co-production of biohydrogen and biogas with biogas production alone showed that the initial investment costs and nutrient requirements are the major contributors to the high production cost (Ljunggren and Zacchi, 2010). Moreover, the sole production of biogas uses resources efficiently and has several environmental benefits over the production of biodiesel and bioethanol (Börjesson and Mattiasson, 2008). Hence, direct biogas production from pretreated wheat straw may be an efficient method of producing renewable energy and techno-economic analyses of this process is recommended for the future.


4 Conclusions

Wheat straw is a lignocellulose residual material that does not compete with land used for producing food and can be used for biogas production. Acid catalysed steam pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis of the straw is efficient and gives high methane yields. A high methane production rate was achieved from the hydrolysate, supplemented with nutrients, in a UASB reactor. Co-digestion of the straw and seaweed hydrolysates in a UASB reactor was efficient and does not require the addition of nutrients or buffering agents. The biogas production from wheat straw may thus compete economically with production from other non-lignocellulose feedstocks.