TITLE: Continuous determination of volatile products in anaerobic fermenters by on-line capillary gas chromatography


1 Introduction

There is a growing interest in renewable energy sources as a result of the increased demand for energy coupled with a rise in the cost of fossil fuels. Rapid industrialization has resulted in the generation of a large quantity of effluents with high organic contents. These effluents, if treated properly, can contribute in environmental protection and energy recovery. Food industry wastes and wastewaters (potato-processing, brewery, soft drinks, sugar and cheese), containing polymeric carbohydrates and starchy materials, are attractive substrates for the industrial production of ethanol. These constituents are pre-hydrolysed using appropriate enzymes and the hydrolysate is used for fermentation in continuous cultures. The stillage obtained from ethanol production can be furthermore treated in a biogas reactor, while the biogas produced could be used for heating purposes.

Zymomonas mobilis can be used for the industrial production of fuel ethanol by fermentation [1]. Z. mobilis is a Gram-negative bacterium capable of producing ethanol from glucose under anaerobic conditions. Compared with commonly used yeasts, it has many advantages including a faster specific rate of ethanol production, improved yield and enhanced ethanol tolerance. One disadvantage associated with continuous ethanol fermentation is the oscillation of substrate, biomass and product. The oscillatory behaviour during ethanol fermentation has been studied by various authors [2–4]; however, the examined parameters were measured in off-line determinations. During the time of oscillations, ethanol productivity decreases leading to high levels of residual substrate which is subsequently lost from production. The continuous fermentation with Z. mobilis is stable as long as end-product inhibition is controlled.

In recent years, considerable attention has been paid towards the development of reactors for the anaerobic treatment of wastes leading to the conversion of organic molecules into biogas. In anaerobic treatment processes, the short-chain volatile fatty acids (SCFA) concentration is usually the process control variable which is measured off-line [5,6]. Soluble organic compounds are converted to SCFA and ethanol by fermentative bacteria. The main components of SCFA present in anaerobic digesters are acetic, propionic, butyric and valeric acid. The latter acids are ultimately converted to methane and carbon dioxide by syntrophic acetogens and methanogenic bacteria. Overloading or toxic disturbances can cause an imbalance in the acid production and consumption resulting in the accumulation of SCFA.

For the determination of ethanol and SCFA, liquid and gas chromatography (L-GC) has been traditionally used [7–13]. For the GC determination of ethanol and SCFA, several methods are available in the literature; within the most reported methods are included: sample pre-treatment with distillation [14–16], headspace chromatography [17–19] and the direct injection method [8,20]. Distillation pre-treatment requires additional equipment, is time consuming and needs experience. Headspace chromatography is not applicable directly on the fermenters broth. Finally, the direct injection method has the advantage of straight determination of volatile organic compounds from a liquid phase, however, the method has been reported to result in peak tailing and ghosting due to contamination of the GC column. Several techniques have been applied to under come this problem such as the use of formic acid [21] and the installation of a liner with wool plug, as a pre-column, for the filtration of suspended pollutants [20].

The potential to obtain analytical data from continuous bioprocesses using GC and certain LC systems is not fully exploited when the information obtained originates from a single sample. Thus, the development of a fully automated on-line monitoring and controlling system is very important in fermentation processes. So far, the automatically measurable parameters in the commercial fermenters are pH, temperature, aeration, agitation and dissolved oxygen. To automatically monitor substrate and product concentrations during fermentation is usually difficult. Automated procedures for the determination of SCFA and alcohols in aqueous solutions have been reported in the literature. These include mainly colorimetric [22], titrimetric methods [23,24], as well as on-line GC [25,26] and LC methods [27]. The first two methods, applicable only for SCFA determination, are based on simple procedures and although they provide accurate results they have the disadvantage of not being able to simultaneously analyze individual components in the fermentation liquid. In the on-line GC methods, the major problem is that one or more sample preparation steps should be included in the GC system because most of the samples taken are not fully compatible with the chromatographic analysis. These steps often result in a highly instrumented setup [26].

In process control GC the sample has to be taken directly from the product stream by means of a by-pass multi-port valve and consequently analyzed. This paper describes a method for the on-line sample preparation and determination, using capillary gas chromatography, of ethanol produced by anaerobic fermentation with Zymomonas mobilis, and short-chain fatty acids during the anaerobic treatment of paper recycling wastewater; both operated in continuous mode. The method was applied for bioprocess monitoring and as a research tool to develop basic understanding of the processes in general.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Pilot scale anaerobic fermenters

60 and 40 L pilot scale fluidized-bed bioreactors with macroporous glass beads (SIRAN^®), as the carrier material, were used for ethanol fermentation with Zymomonas mobolis (ATCC 31821) and for the anaerobic treatment of paper recycling wastewater, respectively. The temperature of the bioreactors was maintained at a set value using water bath (MgW Lauda Thermo-star C12) and water recirculation through the reactors double jacket. The temperature of the ethanol fermenter and the biogas reactor were 30 and 36 °C, respectively. The reactors were equipped with a Mettler Toledo (405-DXK-S125) pH-probe for pH measurement situated on the recycle stream. pH regulation was accomplished with normal NaOH and HCl solutions. The chemicals were introduced into the recycle stream, using peristaltic pumps (Ismatec Mini-S-820) which were operated via a pH control unit (Endress Hauser, conducta). The pH of the ethanol fermenter and the biogas reactor was maintained at 5.0 and 6.5, respectively.


2.2 Sample preparation

The system consists of two departments: the sample preparation and the continuous flow analysis by GC. For the sample preparation, a feed stream from the bioreactor recycle passes through the membrane of the microfiltration unit (MF-Module Type MD 020 CP 2N, Enka AG, Wuppertal) at a continuous flow rate of 60 mL h^−1. After debubbling, the filtered sample is pumped continuously and mixed with hydrochloric acid (0.5 mol L^−1) at a volume ratio of 1:1 using peristaltic pumps (501 U/R Verder GmbH, Duesseldorf). The hydrochloric acid contains also the internal standard. The acidified sample with the internal standard is fed through the continuous flow cell to the waste. In temporally determined intervals, controlled by the software, the one-shot sampler sucks the sample and injects it to the GC system. During this procedure, methanol solution 5% (v/v) is recycled into the storage vessel with the aim of a peristaltic pump (501 U/R Verder GmbH, Duesseldorft). After the sample injection, the needle of the GC is cleaned automatically by pumping the methanol solution into the one-shot sampler. The rinsing phase is accomplished by activation of the magnetic valve of methanol solution; the latter is fed through the continuous flow cell and the injection system, while permeate is fed to the waste. Cleaning of the microfiltration unit was required once per week. A schematic diagram of the on-line sample preparation and analysis system is shown in Fig. 1 .

For real-time data acquisition, data evaluation and process control specially designed computer software (data acquisition and analysis system (DAAS)) was employed. A data interface module (Siemens AG) was used to convert the analog input signal in digital output. The operation of the multi-port magnetic valves was accomplished through a PC with appropriate software (PCI, GC software Chrompack, Mülheim). The stored process data were used for controlling bioreactor and the GC analysis system.


2.3 Sample analysis

The concentration of ethanol and the by-products of fermentation (acetaldehyde, acetoin and acetate) were measured by the aim of gas chromatography using a Chrompack GC (438 AS) equipped with one-shot sampler (Chrompack 940). For the evaluation of the peak areas, n-butanol was used as the internal standard at a known concentration (60 mmol L^−1) in each sample that was analyzed. The samples were acidified with HCl (pH 1–2) for a complete detection of acetic acid. The injector was equipped with a glass liner stoppered with a glass wool plug for the filtration of suspended pollutants. The gas chromatography conditions are listed in Table 1 . Fig. 2 shows the chromatogram from the ethanol fermentation with Zymomonas mobilis.

The concentrations of SCFA (acetic, propionic, i-butyric, n-butyric, i-valeric, n-valeric) were determined using the GC system that was described previously. n-Butanol was used as the internal standard (10 mmol L^−1) and the samples were acidified with HCl (pH 1–2) for the complete detection of SCFA. The gas chromatography conditions are listed in Table 2 . Fig. 3 shows the chromatogram from a standard solution of SCFA and from the bioreactor effluent during real operation. The chromatographic conditions were optimum based on previous experience of the authors with capillary and packed-bed columns. Repeated analysis of standard SCFA solutions (2.5, 5.0, 10.0 and 20.0 mmol L^−1) revealed that the analytical error was less than 5% for the compounds under consideration. Ethanol mean concentrations (±standard deviation) determined using the GC system were equal to 2.59 (±0.10), 4.94 (±0.31), 10.15 (±0.32) and 20.07 (±0.80) mmol L^−1. Acetic acid concentrations were equal to 2.48 (±0.19), 5.09 (±0.19), 9.83 (±0.43) and 20.15 (±0.56) mmol L^−1. Propionic acid concentrations were equal to 2.48 (±0.09), 4.79 (±0.23), 9.87 (±0.38) and 19.95 (±0.75) mmol L^−1. n-Butyric acid concentrations were equal to 2.50 (±0.17), 4.80 (±0.19), 9.92 (±0.40) and 19.71 (±0.55) mmol L^−1.


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Case study 1: ethanol fermentation

Firstly, this automatic sampling and injection technique was applied for the determination of ethanol produced during the anaerobic fermentation of hydrolysed B-starch with Zymomonas mobilis in continuous operation mode. The fermentation broth was automatically sampled from the recycle stream and both ethanol and glucose concentrations were continuously determined. The concentration of glucose in the effluent was determined on-line using a Polarimeter (Perkin-Elmer 241, Dusseldorf, Germany). Details about the continuous determination of glucose can be found elsewhere [28].

In Fig. 4 , the results from the on-line determination of ethanol concentration and the conversion of glucose during continuous fermentation are presented. The hydraulic residence time (HRT) of the fermenter was maintained at 7.2 h for 12 days. The concentration of glucose in the effluent remained below 1 g L^−1, as long as, ethanol concentration did not exceed 75 g L^−1. Within the first day of operation, this concentration was exceeded and the conversion of the carbon source was incomplete (75–95%). From the data presented in Fig. 4a, it can be seen that the ethanol concentration fluctuated significantly (78–60 g L^−1); the average level was approximately 70 g L^−1. The oscillation period was 43–53 h both for effluent ethanol and for glucose conversion. When the feed substrate concentration was increased to 240 g L^−1 glucose (Fig. 4b), ethanol in the effluent reached a maximum concentration of approximately 107 g L^−1 within 1 day of continuous operation. Therefore, severe fluctuations in ethanol concentration were observed (25–80 g L^−1), while the oscillation periods showed to be between 8 and 9 days.

Since the high ethanol concentration is one of the main factors that incite these oscillations, which results in a decrease of cell specific growth and production rate; ethanol fermentation is stable as long as end-product inhibition is controlled.


3.2 Case study 2: anaerobic wastewater treatment

A second application of the on-line sample preparation and GC detection system was for the determination of the effluent short-chain fatty acids from a pilot anaerobic wastewater treatment plant treating paper recycling wastewater. The raw wastewater comprised mainly of acetic and propionic acid at 68.7 (±14.7) and 37.9 (±5.2) mmol L^−1, respectively. The chemical oxygen demand (COD) concentration was 9.50 (±0.18) g L^−1. During reactor operation, the HRT was reduced down to 4.3 h, corresponding to an organic loading rate (OLR) equal to 53.0 (±1.0) kg_COD m^−3 day^−1. During stable reactor operation, the effluent SCFA concentration was below 2.0 mmol L^−1; an indicator of increased efficiency. COD, acetic acid and propionic acid removal was consistently higher than 86, 97 and 96%, respectively.

Fig. 5 shows the on-line measured concentrations of the acetic and propionic acid in the effluent of the anaerobic reactor, before and after an organic overload, caused by pulse reduction of the hydraulic residence time in the reactor. During the organic overload, the HRT was reduced to 2.15 h for 3 h, which corresponds to an OLR of 106.0 (±2.0) kg_COD m^−3 day^−1. This stress situation resulted in an increase in the effluent acetic and propionic acid concentrations (see Fig. 5).

The increase in the SCFA, and especially the propionic acid concentration, during the anaerobic treatment of wastewaters and reactor overload is one of the main indicators for process imbalance and the need for corrective action [29,30]. Process control for high-rate anaerobic wastewater treatment is especially important for bioreactor start-up and for stable operation when significant fluctuations in operational parameters occur (temperature, residence time and wastewater composition).


3.3 Case study 3: continuous fermentation of alcohol-free beer

The on-line data acquisition technique described above was applied in an automatic process control for the continuous production of alcohol-free beer. For this purpose, a highly instrumented fluidized-bed reactor was used; temperature was decreased at nearly 0 °C, while the substrate flow and HRT were changed correspondingly in order to reach the necessary alcohol concentration. The low operational temperature was chosen in order to reduce the microbial metabolic activity for ethanol production. At constant wort quality, fixed temperature and HRT, the alcohol concentration and the beer quality did not change during steady state. In the case of process disturbance or lack of substrate availability the reactor was operated under batch conditions. This situation led to a slow increase of alcohol concentration in the fermentation broth but it was always possible, within 24 h, to return to the previously operated steady state after changing to continuous operation.

Control of yeast metabolism in order to provide only very small amounts of alcohol can be performed exactly and reproductively either by manual adjustment of the relevant process parameters (temperature and residence time) or using automated operation by an integration of microcomputer-supported on-line data acquisition. For this purpose, feed back cycles are used where the set-point for process parameters can be affected by the PC. The resulting beer can have a final alcohol concentration below 0.05% by volume.


4 Conclusions

Bio-ethanol and biogas (methane) produced during the anaerobic conversion of organic compounds has been a subject of great interest since the oil crisis of the 1970s. In ethanol fermentation and in the anaerobic treatment of wastewaters, end-product (ethanol) or intermediate-product (short-chain fatty acids) inhibition occurs, which results in reduced process efficiency and stability; therefore control measures should be taken in continuous operation fermenters. End-product inhibition control cannot be achieved properly if continuous measurements of the product concentration are not performed. Capillary GC can be efficiently applied for continuous determination of volatile products from anaerobic fermenters.

In the present study, a personal computer supervised system for on-line monitoring of the fermentation processes was successfully developed and applied. The system consisted of automatic sampling equipment, a microfiltration module, an on-line GC, A/D and D/A interfaces and a supervised software programme. The results from the on-line GC were used for bioprocess monitoring and as a research tool to develop basic understanding of the processes in general. The system can be applied for quality and process control in industrial applications.

This on-line GC has been applied to study ethanol fermentation with Zymomonas mobilis and anaerobic treatment of paper recycling wastewater. Furthermore, the use of this technique showed to be successful for the continuous fermentation of alcohol-free beer in fluidized-bed bioreactors.