TITLE: Thermal pre-treatment of aerobic granular sludge: Impact on anaerobic biodegradability


1 Introduction

The sewage sludge production has increased in the European Union (EU) from 5.5 million tons of dry matter in 1992 to 10.1 million tons in 2008, and it is estimated that it will reach 13.0 million tons in 2020 (http, 2011). According to the European Commission (EC) this increase is mainly due to the implementation of the Directive 91/271/EEC for Urban Waste Water Treatment (CEC, 1991) as well as the rise up in the number of households connected to sewers and in the level of treatment. The disposal of this excess sludge represents up to 50% of the total operational costs of a waste water treatment plant (WWTP) (Appels et al., 2008). The quantity of this waste which is spread on land for agricultural use is near 40% of the total produced amount in the EU and it is regulated by the Directive 86/278/EEC (CEC, 1986). In this context the sewage sludge production represents an important environmental and economic point to be considered in the design of the WWTPs and new technologies have to be developed in order to, firstly, reduce its production in the process of origin and, also, to improve its subsequent treatment.

The reduction of the sludge production in the origin is an interesting alternative. In this sense, the application of the aerobic granular technology in the WWTPs instead of the conventional activated sludge process could decrease the amount of sludge generated during the secondary treatment (Campos et al., 2009). This technology, where the biomass is forced to grow in compact aggregates in sequencing batch reactors (SBRs), presents various advantages in comparison with the conventional activated sludge process: better settling properties and biomass retention, possibility to carry out simultaneous biological removal processes, capacity to treat higher loads, less surface requirements for its implantation and less sludge production. Liu et al. (2005) estimated the theoretical growth yield of aerobic granules as 0.2 g VSS/g COD_removed, which is in accordance with the results obtained by Mosquera-Corral et al. (2005) operating an aerobic granular reactor fed with a synthetic medium containing acetate. This value involves a reduction of sludge production around 30% with respect to the conventional activated sludge characterized by a sludge growth yield of around 0.3 g VSS/g COD_removed (Heijnen and van Dijken, 1992).

However the development of the aerobic granular biomass is still recent and the research has mainly been focused on the establishment of the different optimum parameters for the reactor operation and formation of aerobic aggregates and nowadays on the scale up from laboratory to pilot reactors and to full scale plants. Up to now, no study has been focused on the treatment of this type of sludge before its disposal. Although granular sludge is expected to have anaerobic degradation potential similar to the activated sludge due to their similar origin, specific studies are necessary to prove it.

The type of treatment applied to the sludge depends on its composition and its final application but normally the first step consists of a thickening to remove the major quantity of water from the solids and reduce its volume. In this sense the dewatering cost of the aerobic granular sludge could be lower than that of activated sludge due to its higher hydrophobicity (Wang et al., 2005) and better settling properties (Beun et al., 2000).

After thickening, the biological digestion (anaerobic digestion, aerobic digestion and composting) is commonly used to transform the amount of highly degradable organic matter into a stable residue and to reduce the number of disease-causing micro-organisms present in the solids before their disposal, for example as fertilizer in agriculture. Among the biological sludge treatments the anaerobic digestion is the most suitable option due to the fact that it allows the stabilization of the sludge and also the production of energy as biogas. From previous research works it has been observed that the anaerobic biodegradability of the sewage sludge ranges from 30 to 50% depending on the type of degraded sludge and its initial organic composition (Mottet et al., 2010). To improve this conversion yield many studies have been performed applying different kinds of pre-treatment (thermal, mechanical and chemical) before the sludge anaerobic digestion (Appels et al., 2008; Carrère et al., 2010). The main objective of these pre-treatments is to improve the solids hydrolysis rate since it is the limiting step in the anaerobic digestion and also allow reducing the final amount of sludge to be disposed.

Carrère et al. (2010) compared different pre-treatment methods used to favor the biodegradability of the sludge. Although extracting a simplified conclusion is difficult, these authors observed that the low energy consuming methods, such as sonication and mechanical pre-treatment, increase the hydrolysis rate but with a limited improvement on VS reduction, while the high impact methods, such as thermal hydrolysis and oxidation, have a significant improvement on both aspects, but with higher operational costs.

Although the thermal pre-treatment presents high energy consumption, the main part of this energy to heat can be recovered from the biogas produced in the anaerobic process. The literature shows that the thermal treatment can be applied in different ranges of temperature and with different times of treatment. Zheng et al. (1998) used a rapid thermal conditioning (30 s) at high temperature (220 °C) and obtained a VS reduction of 55% and a total increase in gas production of 80%, while Gavala et al. (2003) applied the pre-treatment of sludge at 70 °C during 7 days to obtain an increase of 26% in the methane production. Furthermore to know the impact that each pre-treatment has, on each sludge biodegradability, an anaerobic test under batch or continuous conditions is normally performed, which implies long operational periods (between 20 and 30 days for batch tests). In this context Mottet et al. (2010) proposed an estimating model to predict the anaerobic biodegradability of waste activated sludge based on the link between the initial composition of the sludge and its biochemical methane potential (BMP). These authors used the partial least square (PLS) regression technique to obtain a model where both macroscopic (soluble organic carbon and COD/TOC ratio) and biochemical (carbohydrates, proteins and lipids concentrations) parameters were used to predict the anaerobic biodegradability of waste activated sludge.

The aim of this study was to test the effect of the thermal pre-treatment on the macroscopic and biochemical characteristics of the aerobic granular sludge and also to determine the anaerobic biodegradability enhancement when this pre-treatment is applied. The obtained results were also used to validate the model proposed by Mottet et al. (2010) to estimate the anaerobic biodegradability of the aerobic granular biomass.


2 Material and methods


2.1 Aerobic granular sludge samples

The aerobic granular sludge samples were taken from two sequencing batch reactors (SBRs) at pilot scale (useful volume of 100 L each). The first tested sludge (G1) was collected from a reactor located at Santiago de Compostela (Spain) fed with the liquid fraction of pig slurry. In this reactor the removal of organic matter and nitrogen occurred in a SBR operated in cycles of 3 h distributed according to the following periods: 3 min of feeding, 171 min of aeration, 4 min of settling and 2 min of effluent withdrawal. The system operated at a solid retention time (SRT) between 4 and 14 days. The second tested sludge (G2) was collected from a reactor located at Barcelona (Spain) fed with a synthetic medium which simulated an urban wastewater. In this case the removal of organic matter, nitrogen and phosphorus took place in a SBR operated with a cycle comprising anoxic and aerobic reaction phases with a cycle length of 3 h distributed in: 60 min of feeding, 111 min of aeration, 6 min of settling and 3 min of effluent withdrawal. In this case the achieved SRT was of 20–40 days.

In both cases the sludge samples were taken from the solids purge stream along the reactor operational time and stored at 4 °C. In order to remove the major quantity of water and to concentrate the sludge, the samples were settled and the supernatant was discarded. The compositions of the aerobic granular sludge samples used for the experiments are presented in Table 1 .


2.2 Thermal pre-treatment

A thermal pre-treatment was applied to the sludge samples in the range of temperatures from 60 to 210 °C for G1 and from 170 to 210 °C for G2. When temperatures lower than 100 °C were applied to the sample a reactor equipped with a heating/cooling system was used and the sample volume was of 0.6 L. A Zipperclave (Autoclave France) was used when the assayed temperature values were higher than 100 °C and the sample volume was of 0.9 L. For each experiment, once the desired temperature was reached, after 30–60 min from the beginning of the experiment, the pre-treatment was maintained during 20 min. Sludge samples without treatment were arbitrarily associated to 20 °C.


2.3 Analytical methods

In order to determine the composition of the aerobic granular sludge samples several measurements were performed on the original sludge and on the sludge after thermal treatment according to the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater (APHA-AWWA-WPCF, 2005). These measurements were carried out on the total, on the particulate and on the soluble fraction of the sample. To separate and obtain the particulate and soluble fractions each sample was centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C (Beckman JA-20).

The measurement of the total and volatile solids concentration was carried out on the total sludge (TS and VS) and on the solids of centrifugation (TSS and VSS). The supernatant solids concentration was calculated as the difference between the total and the suspended ones.

Chemical oxygen demand (COD), total organic carbon (TOC), proteins and carbohydrates concentrations were determined on total sludge and on supernatant (soluble fraction), the particulate fraction was deduced from the difference between both values. The total COD (COD_T) was determined according to the open reflux method and the soluble COD (COD_S) according to the closed reflux colorimetric method (APHA-AWWA-WPCF, 2005). The TOC was measured with a Shimadzu analyzer (TOC-V_CSN) where the total sample was injected with the module SSM-5000A Shimadzu and the soluble fraction with the module ASI-V Shimadzu. The proteins concentration was measured with the Lowry method (Lowry et al., 1951) and expressed in equivalent bovine serum albumin (BSA). The carbohydrates concentration was measured with the anthrone method (Dreywood, 1946) and expressed in equivalent glucose (Glu).

Lipids concentration was measured on total sludge by accelerated solvent extraction (ASE 200, Dionex) using petroleum ether and volatile fatty acids (VFA) concentration was measured in the soluble fraction by gas chromatography (GC 3900, VARIAN).

The average diameter of the granules in the samples was determined by using an Image Analysis procedure (Tijhuis et al., 1994) with a stereomicroscope (Stemi 2000-C, Zeiss) for particles with a size higher than 1 mm and by using a laser radiation technique (Beckman Coulter LS200 equipped with a LS Variable Speed Fluid Module Plus) for particles with a size lower than 1 mm.

The poly-hydroxialkanoates (PHA) concentration was measured according to a modification of the methodology described by Pijuan et al. (2005). An amount around 30 mg of lyophilized sludge samples was digested and methylated with 4 mL of acidulated methanol (10% H_2SO_4) and 4 mL of chloroform during 20 h at 100 °C. Benzoic acid was used as internal standard and the analyses were performed in a GC system (Agilent 6850).


2.4 Anaerobic biodegradability tests

The tests were carried out in glass flaks of 570 mL (useful volume of 400 mL) with coiled butyl rubber stoppers under the following operational conditions: 35 °C, 120 rpm, 4 g VS/L of inoculum, 1 g VS_substrate/g VS of inoculum, a growth medium containing macro and micro nutrients (1.8 g/L NH_4Cl, 0.7 g/L KH_2PO_4, 0.4 g/L MgCl_2·6H_2O, 0.2 g/L CaCl_2·2H_2O, 20 mg/L FeCl_2·4H_2O, 5 mg/L CoCl_2·6H_2O, 1 mg/L MnCl_2·4H_2O, 1 mg/L NiCl_2·6H_2O, 0.5 mg/L ZnCl_2, 0.5 mg/L H_3BO_3, 0.5 mg/L Na_2SeO_3, 0.4 mg/L CuCl_2·2H_2O and 0.1 mg/L Na_2MoO_4·2H_2O) and 2.6 g/L NaHCO_3. Two control tests were carried out under the same conditions: a blank without substrate (water) to determine the endogenous activity of the inoculum and a test with an easily biodegradable compound (ethanol) to check the activity of the inoculum in a concentration of 4 g COD/L in the vials. The volume of biogas produced was determined by the variation of pressure inside the glass flask by means of a pressure transducer (Mano 2000 Leo2 Keller) and its composition by gas chromatography (Micro GC CP-4900 VARIAN).

From each sample three different fractions were analyzed: (a) the liquid fraction of sludge; (b) the solid fraction of sludge and (c) the whole sludge. The first two determinations were performed to determine the contribution of each phase to the biodegradability of the sample while the third one was done to check the mass balance.


2.5 Calculations

The solubilization yield due to the thermal treatment was calculated as the ratio between the soluble fraction after the treatment (COD_S) minus the initial soluble fraction (COD_S0) and the initial particulate fraction (COD_P0). An example for the calculation of COD solubilization is presented on Eq. (1). FORMULA: S COD = COD S − COD S 0 COD 0 − COD S 0 = COD S − COD S 0 COD P 0

The biomethane potential (BMP) was expressed as the volume of methane produced per gram of COD of substrate (mL_CH4/g COD_substrate), and the biodegradability (BD) was determined according to Mottet et al. (2010) by dividing the BMP calculated by the theoretical value in standard conditions (350 mL_CH4/g COD at 1 atm and 0 °C).


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Effects of thermal treatment on aerobic granular sludge characteristics

The variation of the total COD, proteins, lipids and carbohydrates contents of sample G1 after being submitted to the different tested temperatures was evaluated (Fig. 1 ). The total COD, proteins and lipids content remained almost constant for all the assayed temperatures, which mean that they were not degraded with the heat. The decrease of carbohydrates content was attributed to the measurement method. As Bougrier et al. (2008) explained the carbohydrates may react with other carbohydrates (“burnt sugar” reactions), which provokes the disappearance of the carbonyl function (C = 0), that is used in their quantification and this is the reason of their underestimation. The results for sample G2 are in agreement with the conclusions exposed for G1.

The measured concentration of lipids was low, between 0.05 and 0.18 g/L for G1 and 0.01–0.10 g/L for G2, in comparison with the concentrations observed in activated sludge samples, between 0.24 and 3.4 g/L (Mottet et al., 2010). This is probably due to the low fats content in the feeding of the reactor of origin (pig manure and synthetic urban wastewater) compared with the fats present in an urban wastewater. The VFA concentration in the soluble phase remained constant around 1.4 g/L and 7.5 g/L for G1 and G2, respectively. This result indicates that the accumulation of VFA with the thermal treatment was not significant probably due to the low lipids content in the sludge samples.

The solids repartition (Fig. 2 ) indicated that the main effect of the thermal treatment was the solubilization of the organic compounds from the particulate to the soluble phase, while the mineral fraction varied slightly between both phases. This difference might be caused by the error in the measurement and associated with the heterogeneity of the aerobic granules. Differences in the solids composition between sample G1 and sample G2 can also be observed (Fig. 2). In sample G1 (from the reactor treating pig manure to remove C and N) the organic fraction represented 92% of the total solids, while in sample G2 (from the reactor treating synthetic urban wastewater to remove C, N and P) this fraction only represented 55–60%. The high proportion of the mineral fraction in the sludge G2 can be associated to the higher SRT in the aerobic reactor and above all to the removal of phosphorus and the presence of a precipitate material in the core of some granules (Fig. 3 ). de Kreuk et al. (2005) operated a SBR with aerobic granular biomass and observed that the mineral content of the granules increased from 6% to 30–41% when the removal of phosphorus was promoted. These authors explained that part of the phosphate removal might be caused by the precipitation of apatite inside de granules.

For the experiments performed with temperatures below 115 °C the percentages of solubilization were similar and they seemed to be independent from the temperature (Fig. 4 ). However in the case of temperatures above this value the percentages of solubilization increased quickly with the rise of the temperature. To explain this behavior it has to be taken into account that in the experiments of thermal treatment at 60 °C and 90 °C the aerobic granular sludge G1 presented a viscous aspect similar to that of a gel, reaching the maximum gel compactness structure at 115 °C. After removing the sample from the interior of the thermal reactor a “block” of sludge was obtained (Fig. 5 ). This behavior is contrary to the tendency observed by Bougrier et al. (2008). These authors measured the apparent viscosity of a waste activated sludge after the thermal treatment (temperatures between 20 °C and 190 °C) and they observed that it decreased with the temperature for all the temperatures tested. An explanation for this gelatinous aspect at temperatures below or equal to 115 °C could be the high EPS content, with gel-forming properties, of the aerobic granular biomass with respect to the activated sludge (Seviour et al., 2009). Indeed, at these moderate temperatures the EPS were slightly released from the surface of the granules to the media and they acted as a bond to maintain the gel structure. However, at high temperatures the EPS solubilization was higher, as it can be observed on Fig. 4 (high percentage of proteins and carbohydrates solubilization) and EPS probably lost their gel-forming properties.

The maximum solubilization values were obtained at temperature of 190 °C for all the parameters measured. For higher temperatures the solubilization percentage of proteins remained almost constant while a decrease of 30% for carbohydrates, 14% for VS and 4% for COD was measured. In case of sample G2 the results obtained with the studied temperatures (170, 190 and 210 °C) were in agreement with the results from sample G1: maximum solubilization at 190 °C (except for the carbohydrates with a maximum solubilization value of 42% at 170 °C) and then a decrease at 210 °C. Bougrier et al. (2008) also observed the maximum solubilization ratios around 170–190 °C for activated sludge and then a dispersion of the values with higher temperatures, which could be due to the occurrence of reactions between the compounds like the Maillard reaction, which is a chemical reaction between an amino acid and a carbohydrate, usually requiring heat, to form complex molecules.

The results of the solubilization percentages obtained with the aerobic granular biomass were compared to those from activated sludge at 190 °C (Table 2 ). For all the parameters measured, the percentage of solubilization was higher in sample G1 than in sample G2 (Table 2). The solubilization values obtained for aerobic granules were in the same range as those reported for the activated sludge samples, except for the proteins, which had a higher solubilization in the case of granular sludge.

The thermal treatment also provoked changes on the pH of the liquid media and average diameter of the granules (Table 3 ). The decrease of pH with the temperature could be associated with the formation of acid compounds due to the degradation of macromolecules, however production of VFA was not observed. The average diameter of the aerobic granules moderately decreased with the temperatures between 60 and 115 °C and it strongly decreases with temperatures higher than these (Laurent et al., 2009). However for temperatures between 140 and 210 °C it was impossible to obtain a tendency on the evolution of the average diameter, due to the error associated to the measurement. Then it is possible to conclude that, as it was mentioned before, at low temperatures the gel-forming structure is responsible of the low diameter reduction, while when the temperature is above 115 °C the reduction on the median diameter is higher. The determination of the average diameter at 115 °C was not possible due to the gel structure of the sample.


3.2 Batch anaerobic digestion

To evaluate the effect of the thermal pre-treatment on the anaerobic biodegradability of the aerobic granular sludge batch anaerobic tests were performed after submitting the biomass to the assayed temperature. The cumulative methane production per gram of COD_substrate for the different pre-treatment conditions was followed in duplicate assays (Fig. 6 ). The methane production from the control experiments without substrate addition was subtracted. The percentage of biodegradability (BD) for each sample is indicated in Table 4 . The initial BD of the sludge G1 without treatment (20 °C) was around 33% and although it is in the range of the BD for waste activated sludge (30–50%), this value was near the low limit and indicated a poor BD of G1. The thermal treatment caused an improvement of the anaerobic BD for all the temperatures tested with the sample G1. The BD increased until a maximum value of 62% at 170 °C, which corresponds to an enhancement of the BD of 88% with respect to the original sample. Then, with higher temperatures the BD decreased, but it remained higher than the untreated sludge.

The initial BD of the sludge G2 without treatment (20 °C) was of 49% and there was no significant difference after the thermal pre-treatment at 170 °C. Only when the tested temperatures were as high as 190 and 210 °C the BD increased slightly up to 56 and 58%, respectively, which supposed an enhancement between 14 and 18% with respect to the untreated sample G2. These results indicated that the high temperatures necessary to obtain a little improvement in the BD do not justify the application of the thermal treatment for this sludge. But it is still interesting to note that for this sample G2 at temperatures over 190 °C the tendency of the BD was to increase, whereas the contrary was observed with sample G1 and with sewage sludge (Bougrier et al., 2008; Pinnekamp, 1989).

Although sample G1 had a smaller granule average diameter and a lower sludge age (SRT on the reactor of origin) than G2, which could favor a higher BD, the opposite was observed. The different results obtained with both aerobic granular samples could be explained by the different concentration of PHA and VFA (easily biodegradable compounds). The concentration of these compounds represented the 3.4% and 4.7% of the COD_T for PHA and VFA, respectively, on sample G1. However on sample G2 the percentages of PHA and VFA represented a higher contribution with 11.5% and 12.8% of the COD_T, respectively. If it is considered that the PHAs and VFAs were degraded completely during the anaerobic digestion, the contribution of these compounds to the biodegradability represented the 8.1% for G1 and the 24.3% for G2, being the difference of 16.2%, the same that was observed in the BMP tests.

If the values of BD ( Table 4) are compared, the maximum difference between both aerobic granular samples was observed for the treatments with temperatures higher than 170 °C. In the case of G1 the temperature of 170 °C was the optimal one for the BD enhancement, while it did not induce any change for G2. At 190 and 210 °C the values of BD obtained with both samples were similar; however the enhancement with respect to the original BD was higher in G1. This is in accordance with Bougrier et al. (2008) who observed that the BD enhancement was larger with lower initial BD and higher COD solubilization after the thermal treatment. In this study similar results were observed indicating that sample G1 which had the lower initial BD presented also the higher solubilization percentage after the thermal pre-treatment in comparison with sample G2 (Table 2). The different substrate used in the reactor of origin of the samples (pig manure for G1 and synthetic medium for G2) could be the responsible for the different characteristics of the aerobic granules, being their composition determinant in the potential anaerobic biodegradability. In this sense Mottet et al. (2010) developed a model that correlates the BD and the sample composition for activated sludge.

The values of BD obtained in this work were used to validate this model proposed by Mottet et al. (2010) Eq. (2) to predict the anaerobic BD of a sludge based on the following parameters: proteins (Prot), carbohydrates (Carb), lipids (Lpd), COD/TOC ratio (Ox) and soluble organic carbon (SolOc). The results with the model and the error associated with respect to the experimental data are presented in Table 4. From the twelve samples tested the better estimation was for G1 at 20 °C (untreated) with an error of 2% and the worse one for G1 at 190 °C with an error of 18%. The prediction error obtained by the authors was of 11% with this model. It has to be underlined that this model has been developed for waste activated sludge samples and that it allows a good prediction of anaerobic biodegradability of aerobic granular sludge. So the model parameters seem to be adequate to predict the anaerobic biodegradability of sewage sludge (granular or not) being quicker to obtain than the results of an anaerobic test. FORMULA: BD = 0.043 − 0.106 · Prot + 0.661 · Carb + 0.836 · Lpd + 0.074 · Ox + 0.349 · SolOc

It is also interesting to know the way each fraction contributes to the total methane production in the batch anaerobic tests (Fig. 7 ). The contribution of the soluble fraction increased with the temperature for both samples; however the contribution of the particulate fraction was different. For sample G1 the particulate fraction at temperatures between 60 and 170 °C contributed more than the particulate fraction without treatment. However the amount of organic compounds in this phase was lower due to their solubilization, indicating that for G1 the particulate phase became more biodegradable with the thermal treatment in the range of 60–170 °C than without treatment. For this sample the maximum contribution of the particulate fraction was at 140 °C, being at 170 °C a little bit higher than without treatment and quite lower than at 140 °C. Then at temperatures higher than 170 °C the contribution of the particulate phase was lower than without treatment, surely due to the solubilization of the organic compounds with a consequent higher contribution of the soluble fraction.

For sample G2 the contribution of the particulate fraction at 170 °C was the lowest one from all the tested temperatures and also quite lower than the sample without treatment, which could explain the low BD at 170 °C of G2 in comparison with sample G1 and conventional waste activated sludge. The contribution of the particulate fraction at 190 and 210 °C was in the same range than G1 (70–75 N-ml CH_4/g-COD).

The thermal pre-treatment of the sludge provided different results depending on the origin and the composition of the sludge. In this case BD values after the thermal pre-treatment for sludge G1 were similar to those obtained with activated sludge. However sludge G2 presented similar tendency but the increase of BD was very low at the temperatures normally applied to activated sludge.


4 Conclusions

The fact that the origin and composition of the sludge can affect its post-treatment makes it interesting to evaluate each kind of biomass by experimental studies.

Experiences performed with two aerobic granular biomasses indicated that their BD (33% and 49%) was similar to that obtained for an activated sludge (30–50%) and demonstrated the feasibility of their anaerobic digestion.

The thermal pre-treatment, before the anaerobic digestion, was proposed to enhance the BD when this is initially low and similar results to those from previous works, with conventional waste activated sludge, were obtained.

The thermal treatment had a little effect on the total composition of the aerobic granular samples, but an important effect on the solubilization of the organic compounds. The maximum solubilization yield for both aerobic granular biomasses was observed at 190 °C.

The different characteristics of the aerobic granular samples influenced by the feeding media of the reactor, the involved removal processes, PHA and VFA concentrations, etc., could be responsible for the differences in the initial obtained BD and the optimal temperature for the thermal pre-treatment. In the case of the aerobic granules from a reactor treating pig manure with removal of C and N the initial BD was of 33% and for all the temperatures tested (60–210 °C) the pre-treatment led to an enhancement being between 20% (60 °C) and 88% (170 °C). However for the aerobic granules from a reactor treating a synthetic wastewater with removal of C, N and P the initial BD was higher (49%) but the thermal pre-treatment only enhanced a little (14% and 18%) the methane production and at high temperatures (190 and 210 °C). This slight enhancement definitively does not justify the application of such a treatment.

The results obtained in this work allowed to validate the model developed on waste activated sludge by Mottet et al. (2010) for its application to the case of aerobic granular sludge. This calculation allows the estimation of the BD of a sludge based on its chemical characteristics.