TITLE: Mathematical modeling of process liquid flow and acetoclastic methanogenesis under mesophilic conditions in a two-phase biogas reactor


1 Introduction

In order to provide long-term energy supply, a worldwide sustainable energy production needs to be established. In this context, research and extension of renewable energies are essential. Biogas produced by anaerobic digestion fermenters plays an important role (Chynoweth et al., 2001). Methane production is the result of several chemical and physical processes that occur in a biogas reactor. This is a reactor in which a duly chosen biomass leads to generation of methane through fermentation. The gas has to be conveyed to other parts of the plant and has to be finally delivered to a users network. As any other industrial plant, the efficiency of the production cycle has to be optimized. The scope of research is thus to optimize methane production. Several factors concur to achieve this goal. These concern the technical aspects related to the design of the biogas plant, the composition of the biomass, and the processes taking place in the reactor. The influence of the composition of the biomass on the methane yield was investigated, for example, by Amon et al. (2006b). Additionally, the influence of energy crops on the methane yield was investigated in order to achieve a sustainable crop rotation with maximal methane yield (Amon et al., 2006a). The crucial process occurring in a biogas reactor is the anaerobic digestion performed by microorganisms. In order to be able to understand this process and quantify the methane yield, Batstone et al. (2002) formalized an anaerobic digestion model (ADM1). The ADM1 model covers all four phases of the anaerobic digestion process (hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis and methanogenesis). Since then, the ADM1 model was used to further investigate and optimize anaerobic digestion in biogas plants (Blumensaat and Keller, 2005). Wett et al. (2007) optimized the design of a biogas plant according to results obtained through mathematical modeling. Anaerobic co-digestion of olive mill wastewater with olive mill solid waste was studied by Boubaker and Ridha (2008), Wichern et al. (2009) examined monofermentation of grass silage under mesophilic conditions by using the ADM1 model, and Thamsiriroj and Murphy (2011) investigated the mono-digestion of grass silage in a 2-stage CSTR anaerobic digester. The research in this field has considered neither the coupling between process liquid flow and models for anaerobic digestion nor the spatial dependence of microorganisms and chemical substances. However, this is an important issue to determine relevant parameters of a biogas plant, e.g., its effectiveness (ratio of local to maximal methane production). A further understanding should thus be achieved by formulating a mathematical model, which couples process liquid flow with the chemical reactions carried out by microorganisms. Such a mathematical involves quantities that are spatially resolved. Investigating a mathematical model which addresses the above described problems is the main purpose of this contribution. For modeling process liquid flow, the second stage of the biogas reactor is considered to be filled with a porous medium, where the matrix consists of the plastic tower packing with microorganisms growing on it, the latter being assumed to be immobile. The concept of porous media is used in various fields, e.g., in geosciences where the flow of groundwater in geological porous media (e.g., aquifers) is investigated (Grillo et al., 2010). Another example is drug penetration through the skin, which is a biological porous medium (Naegel et al., 2008).

In order to couple flow and reaction processes, the biogas reactor needs to be spatially discretized. This means that the biogas reactor is approximated by a computational grid consisting of triangles or quadrangles in 2D or tetrahedra in 3D. Typically, in each grid point all variables (concentrations, pressure, etc.) are computed. This information can help to improve the effectivity of the biogas plant as spatial dependencies can be considered, e.g., a spatially varying concentration of acetate or pH. A measure for effectivity of the biogas reactor can be defined by investigating local methane production (in each grid point).


2 Methods


2.1 Experimental setup

This section describes briefly the laboratory scale plant used in the experiments. The anaerobic filter (cf. Fig. 1 [3]) and the second fluid circulation (cf. from Fig. 1 [5]) are described in detail as the main focus of this work lies on these two parts.


2.1.1 Design of the laboratory scale plant

A laboratory-scale plant (Fig. 1) consists of a hydrolysis reactor (Fig. 1 [1]), a reservoir (Fig. 1 [2]), a downstream fixed film anaerobic filter (Fig. 1 [3]), two circulation systems (Fig. 1 [4], [5]), a biogas bag (Fig. 1 [6]), and an automated gas analysis system (Fig. 1 [7]).

The hydrolysis reactor is a square-box-fermenter made of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and having a total usable volume of 100 l. The reservoir and the anaerobic filter are double-walled bodies of cylindrical shape made of transparent acrylic glass and having a total usable volume of 55.4 and 32.12 l, respectively. The anaerobic filter is 0.71 m high, features a cross section with a diameter of 0.24 m, and is randomly packed with plastic tower packing “Bioflow 40” (Rauschert, Judenbach-Heinersdorf, Germany). Both the reservoir and the anaerobic filter are equipped with a thermostated water jacket “E 100” (Lauda, Lauda-Königshofen, Germany), and are heated up to 55 and 38 °C, respectively. The hydrolysis reactor is heated up by the leachate in the reservoir.

The first circulation system features a membrane pump W 100 (Wilden, Grand Terrace, USA) and connects the leachate reservoir with the hydrolysis reactor. In the second circulation system, a continuous volume flow is achieved by a peristaltic pump PD 5201 (HEIDOLPH, Schwabach, Germany). This system connects the anaerobic filter with the hydrolysis reactor. The biogas bags are TECOBAG having a volume of 100 l (Tasseraux, Bürstadt, Germany). The automated gas analysis system consists of a Drum-type Gasmeter TG 05/5 (RITTER, Bochum, Germany) and a gas analysis device SSM 6000 (PRONOVA, Berlin, Germany).


2.1.2 Operation of the laboratory scale plant

The biomass (10 kg rye silage, 1 kg rye straw) is discontinuously filled in the hydrolysis reactor during a 21 d period of experiments. The circulation of process liquid operates in two different circulation systems. Due to percolation, the dissolved organic compounds are accumulated in the process liquid which is collected in the hydrolyzate reservoir.

In the first circulation, the process water ( 60 l h - 1 ) is led back into the hydrolysis reactor by the membrane pump W 100 for regulating the temperature regime and maintaining the optimal moisture content in the organic solid matter. Furthermore, the microorganisms, which are involved in the biomass degradation process, are transported back.

In the second circulation, a continuous volume flow ( 1 l h - 1 ) is achieved by the peristaltic pump PD 520. Here, the process liquid is transferred from the reservoir of the process liquid into the fixed film anaerobic filter. Before the process liquid flows in the anaerobic filter, the concentration of the following organic acids are determined by a gas chromatography: acetic acid, propionic acid, butyric acid, valeric acid and caproic acid. Furthermore, the acetic acid equivalence and the pH are measured. The process liquid that flows out of the anaerobic filter, is analyzed for acetic acid equivalence and pH.

The generated biogas is collected in the separate 100 l gas bags TECOBAG. Once a day an automated gas analysis is performed and the volume is recorded. A magnet valve is activated by a control unit. The gas is extracted through the Drum-type Gasmeter TG 05/5 and the gas analysis device SSM 6000 for gas composition analysis. Depending on the amount of gas, the gasmeter sends impulses to the control unit. At the same time the pressure sensor examines the difference between system pressure and ambient pressure. With an empty gas tank the pressure difference drops, resulting in a voltage drop. The pump is turned off and the magnet valve closes. The incoming data is logged.


2.2 Mathematical model

In this section the mathematical model for process liquid flow and acetoclastic methanogenesis is presented.

Degradation, which takes place in the anaerobic filter, consists of the decomposition of acetate into methane and carbon dioxide (cf. [3] in Fig. 1). Hereby, the degradation process is performed by microorganisms. Table 1 shows the denotation of every modeled process.

The model presented in this section is very general and only little modification is needed to apply this model to similar multi-constituent flow/reaction problems. Note that it is always necessary to distinguish between the model for flow 2.2.1, and the model for reactions 2.2.2, where the processes from Table 1 are modeled.


2.2.1 Modeling of flow

The study of the anaerobic filter requires considering processes involving a solid, a fluid and a gaseous phase. Each phase comprises several constituents. The features and functions of these constituents are very diverse. Indeed, the constituents of the liquid and gaseous phases are mainly chemical species that take part in, or are the products of, reactions, whereas the constituents of the solid phase confer an internal structure to the filter. Such a structure is determined by the arrangement of the plastic tower packing inserted in the filter and may depend on the local population of the microorganisms deposited on the packing because a change in population alters the space available to the circulation of the liquid and gases in the filter. In principle, a comprehensive analysis of the processes occurring in the filter should take into account all phases and all constituents. This could be accomplished by means of a multi-constituent, multiphase-flow model with chemical reactions. This is a mathematical description in which both the liquid and the gases, which co-exist in the void space of the solid phase, are subjected to flow and chemical reactions, and their constituents follow advection–diffusion–reaction equations. Such a model, however, would have to face two major difficulties: the first one is technical and due to the fact that a very large number of nonlinear, coupled partial differential equations should be solved; the second one arises from the fact that more experimental information would be needed, which is neither currently available in the literature nor easy to extract from the performed experiments. These reasons impose some limitations to the modeler, who has to select the processes which are essential for the production of methane, neglect those whose contribution is believed to be marginal, and consider only the equations describing the evolution of the constituents which, under appropriate working hypotheses, play a major role in the characterization of the phase in which they are present. In this respect, the principal constituents of the solid, liquid and gaseous phase are, respectively, the plastic tower packing (PTP) and the microorganisms (MO) deposited on it, water ( H 2 O ) and acetate (Ac), and methane ( CH 4 ) and carbon dioxide ( CO 2 ). Each of the mentioned constituents should be studied by considering appropriate balance laws. However, a satisfactory agreement between simulations and experiments can be achieved by considering even a smaller number of constituents as explicitly present in the model. Meaning that, even when a given constituent has to be accounted for, nothing will be said about the balance laws associated with it (cf. Section 3.6).

In summary, the equations of the reduced mathematical model describe the flow of a multi-constituent single-phase liquid through a porous medium (plastic tower packing and microorganisms deposited on it). Despite the single-phase approach, the model is able to simulate the transport processes and reactions in which the constituents of the liquid phase take part, the variation of the population of the microorganisms, the production of carbon dioxide, and the production of methane (main goal of the plant and necessary to evaluate the effectiveness of the reactor). Within the solid and the liquid phase, every quantity has an associated mass fraction and density. The theory reported in the rest of this section is widely documented in the publications by Bear and Bachmat (1990) and Hassanizadeh and Gray (1980).

The solid phase, P s, is defined by FORMULA: P s ≔ { MO,PTP } . The mass fraction of the microorganisms is denoted by ω MO s and the mass fraction of the plastic tower packing by ω PTP s. The apparent density of the solid phase ρ s is FORMULA: ρ s = ω MO s ρ MO s + ( 1 - ω MO s ) ρ PTP s , where ρ MO s is the density of the microorganisms and ρ PTP s the density of the plastic tower packing. Note that the sum of all mass fractions within a single phase equals one. Therefore, the equation ( 1 - ω MO s ) = ω PTP s holds.

The liquid phase, P l, is defined by FORMULA: P l ≔ { H 2 O,Ac } . Let ω H 2 O l denote the mass fraction of water and ω Ac l the mass fraction of acetate. The apparent density of the liquid phase reads FORMULA: ρ l = ω Ac l ρ Ac l + ( 1 - ω Ac l ) ρ H 2 O l , where ρ Ac l is the density of acetate and ρ H 2 O l the density of water.

The accumulated local gas production is computed by the formula FORMULA: P g ( t , x ) ≔ ∫ 0 t R l → g ( T , x ) d T = ∫ 0 t ( R Ac → CO 2 ( T , x ) + R Ac → CH 4 ( T , x ) ) d T . The accumulated local methane production is then given by FORMULA: P CH 4 ( t , x ) = 4 15 P g ( t , x ) = ∫ 0 t R Ac → CH 4 ( T , x ) d T . Hereby, the fraction 4/15 is needed to account for the molecular weight of CH_4 and CO_2 (cf. Section 2.2.2).

In order to study the effectiveness of the reactor, the maximal local methane production is defined: FORMULA: P max ( t ) ≔ max x P CH 4 ( t , x ) . The effectiveness of the reactor can then be defined by FORMULA: Eff ( t ) ≔ 1 V Reactor ∫ V Reactor P CH 4 ( t , x ) P max ( t ) d x , where V Reactor is the total usable volume of the reactor.

The volume fraction of the solid phase is denoted by ϕ. Depending on whether the population of microorganisms increases or not, the volume fraction of the solid phase can either increase or decrease.

The volume fraction of the pore space is ( 1 - ϕ ). It is assumed to be completely filled with liquid. By applying the mass balance laws for microorganisms, acetate, the solid and the liquid phase, the following closed set of partial differential equations is obtained: FORMULA: ∂ ( ϕ ρ s ) ∂ t = R l → s - R s → l FORMULA: ∂ ( ϕ ρ s ω MO s ) ∂ t = R Ac → MO - R MO → l FORMULA: ∂ [ ( 1 - ϕ ) ρ l ] ∂ t = - ∇ ( ρ l q l ) + R s → l - R l → s - R l → g FORMULA: ∂ ( 1 - ϕ ) ρ l ω Ac l ∂ t = - ∇ ρ l ω Ac l q l - ρ l D ( ϕ ) ∇ ω Ac l + R MO → Ac - R Ac → MO - R Ac → CH 4 - R Ac → CO 2 . Hereby, D is the diffusion tensor and q _l is Darcy velocity of the liquid, which is given by FORMULA: q l = - K ( ϕ ) μ ( ∇ p l - ρ l g ) , where K is the permeability tensor, μ is viscosity, p l is pressure, g is the gravity acceleration vector.Remark 2.1 As the sum of all reactions used in the equations for the gas phase (5), the solid phase (9) and the liquid phase (11) cancel out, the local mass is preserved.


2.2.2 Modeling of reactions

This section covers all reactions used in this model. In acetoclastic methanogenesis methane is produced by degradation of acetate. Hereby, the degradation process is carried out by microorganisms. The model includes growth, uptake and decay of acetate degrading microorganisms. Solubility of methane in the liquid phase is not included due to the very low solubility of methane. Furthermore, a new inhibition factor is introduced to account for the size, shape and number of the plastic tower packing in the reactor. Note that in this section local concentrations are used. Local concentrations are computed depending on the substance’s phase: FORMULA: C MO s ≔ ϕ ρ s ω MO s microorganisms concentration FORMULA: C Ac l ≔ ( 1 - ϕ ) ρ l ω Ac l acetate concentration. As suggested, e.g., by Batstone et al. (2002) and Wichern et al. (2009) a Michaelis–Menten term for uptake is used, with growth and methane production being implicit (cf. Table 1): FORMULA: R Ac → MO ≔ k m,Ac Y Ac C Ac l K s Ac + C Ac l C MO s I ( C MO s , C Ac l ) FORMULA: R Ac → CH 4 ≔ 4 15 k m,Ac ( 1 - Y Ac ) C Ac l K s Ac + C Ac l C MO s I ( C MO s , C Ac l ) FORMULA: R Ac → CO 2 ≔ 11 4 R Ac → CH 4 , where k m,Ac is the uptake rate, Y Ac is the fraction used for growth, K s Ac is the Michaelis–Menten constant and I ( C MO s , C Ac l ) the inhibition factor. Although carbon dioxide is not considered in the gas phase, the reaction term R Ac → CO 2 is still needed for the phase transition reactions and for the reaction terms regarding acetate. The fractions 11/4 and 4/15 in R Ac → CO 2 and R Ac → CH 4 are needed to account for the different molecular weights of carbon dioxide (44 g/mol) and methane (16 g/mol).

First order decay for microorganisms is used: FORMULA: R MO → l ≔ k dec C MO s FORMULA: R MO → Ac ≔ k dec f ac,MO C MO s , where k dec is the decay rate and f ac,MO is the fraction, which is converted back into acetate. These reaction terms are used in Eqs. (5), (10) and (12).Remark 2.2 If the condition C Ac l ≫ K s Ac holds true and no inhibition occurs, the following can be written FORMULA: C Ac l K s Ac + C Ac l ≈ 1 FORMULA: I ( C MO s , C Ac l ) ≈ 1 . In this case, the doubling time t _d and the maximal specific growth rate μ max of the microorganisms read: FORMULA: μ max = k m,Ac Y Ac - k dec FORMULA: t d = ln ( 2 ) μ max .Finally, the phase transition reactions have to be defined. Although an equation for carbon dioxide is not included, the phase reaction term R Ac → CO 2 needs to be considered here in order to maintain the correct mass of the liquid phase. FORMULA: R l → s ≔ R Ac → MO FORMULA: R s → l ≔ R MO → l FORMULA: R l → g ≔ R Ac → CH 4 + R Ac → CO 2 . Phase transition terms are used in Eqs. (5), (9) and (11). According to experimental data the variation of pH around 7.9 is very small and hence pH inhibition can be neglected in this case. Although, pH inhibition can be included for example by using inhibition factors according to Batstone et al. (2002).

The microorganisms grow on the plastic tower packing, and the maximal mass of microorganisms depends on the size, shape and the number of the plastic tower packing. Therefore, the inhibition factor is introduced: FORMULA: I ( C MO s , C Ac l ) ≔ 1 - C MO s MO max , where MO max is a parameter depending on size, shape and total number of the plastic tower packing. This inhibition factor will decrease growth and uptake for C MO s → MO max, which is the case when the plastic tower packing is being overpopulated. In (27) MO max corresponds to the maximal possible concentration of microorganisms C MO s, hence, 0 ⩽ C MO s < MO max holds.


2.3 Computational methods


2.3.1 Model geometry, boundary and initial conditions

The inflow and outflow of the anaerobic filter are assumed to be equally distributed along the top and bottom plate, respectively. A two dimensional model with radius and height as coordinates was used for all computations. As expected, the solution was actually one dimensional. The usage of a 2D or 3D geometry is motivated by the possibility to incorporate a non-equally distributed inflow at the top plate and also to include information about the position of the plastic tower packing, if available, in the computation. The size of the model geometry was determined from experimental data (cf. Section 2.1).

In order to cope with the fluid circulation, the velocity FORMULA: q l · n = 1 l 1 h ( 0.12 m ) 2 π is used in order to achieve a total influx of 1 l h - 1 at the top plate. Hereby, n is the normal vector at the top plate of the reactor. Additionally, Dirichlet boundary conditions for acetate concentration according to measured data from experiments are chosen at the top plate. The pressure was set to a constant value while acetate concentration was set to zero on the bottom plate. With these boundary conditions it is possible to measure the outflow of the liquid and its acetate concentration in the model and compare these values to experimental data (cf. Section 3.2). Normal flux was set to zero for acetate and the liquid-phase on the lateral surface.

Linear initial conditions were used for ω MO s , ϕ and ω Ac l. Additionally, a linear function was chosen for p to account for hydrostatic pressure.


2.3.2 Discretization and solver

In summa, the equations to be solved are (9)–(12) in conjunction with (5). All computations were performed using the software tool UG (Lang and Wittum, 2005; Bastian et al., 2000). The discretization in time was performed using a backward Euler method. For the discretization in space, a finite volume scheme with linear elements was employed (Bank and Rose, 1987; Michev, 1996). Since the system is nonlinear, Newton’s method was applied. Within Newton’s method an algebraic multigrid solver was used to invert the Jacobian. In total up to 331,000 degrees of freedom (DOF) were used. Further information on solving nonlinear problems with a high amount of DOF can be found in Ortega and Rheinboldt (1987), Hackbusch (1985, 1992) and Deuflhard (2006).


2.3.3 Parameter estimation techniques

The fitness function f, which is defined below, can be split into two parts. The first part, f ˜, is a measure for the relative deviation of experimental data compared to data derived by the model FORMULA: f ˜ ( k m,Ac , Y Ac , k dec , K s Ac , MO max , f ac,MO ) = 1 44 ∑ i = 0 43 Ac out, i Exp - Ac out, i Mod 2 . Hereby, Ac out Exp is the total measured outflow of acetate and Ac out Modis the outflow of acetate computed by the model. The reaction parameters were estimated with respect to experiment a–d from Fig. 2 at the same time, meaning that the first four experiments were combined to one larger experiment with a total of 44 measurement points and 84 d (each experiment had 11 measurement points and lasted 21 d).

We remark that minimizing f ˜ leads to a very good fitting of experimental data. Nevertheless, this is not a sufficient criterion for correct parameter estimation; all considered variables need to be observed very carefully in order to detect incorrect behavior. Indeed, by minimizing f ˜, one would observe a monotonically increasing number of microorganisms from day 1 to day 84. However, this is not realistic because, if the reactor has already been used for a large number of experiments (all experiments are similar and last 21 d), an almost periodic behavior of the total mass of microorganisms (with a periodicity of 21 d) should be observed. In order to deal with this issue, the second part of f , Δ MO 2, is defined: FORMULA: MO ( t ) = ∫ C MO s ( t , x ) d x FORMULA: MO ¯ = 1 3 ( MO ( 0 ) + MO ( 42 ) + MO ( 63 ) ) FORMULA: Δ MO 2 = 1 3 MO ( 0 ) MO ¯ - 1 2 + MO ( 42 ) MO ¯ - 1 2 + MO ( 63 ) MO ¯ - 1 2 , where MO(t) is the total mass of microorganisms at time t. The total number of microorganisms is proportional to the total mass. In order to account for the expected periodicity, the average number of microorganisms, MO ¯, is evaluated at three critical points of the combined experiment (day 0, day 42, day 63). The computations showed that a minimum of at least three critical points is needed in order to obtain the periodic behavior. It was not necessary to use all five possible critical points (day 0, day 21, day 42, day 63, day 84). The quantity Δ MO 2 is a measure of the relative change in the mass of microorganisms at these three critical points. The fitness function f is then chosen as a combination of f ˜ and Δ MO 2: FORMULA: f ( k m,Ac , Y Ac , k dec , K s Ac , MO max , f ac,MO ) = f ˜ + Δ MO 2 f ˜ · 10 3 = ( 1 + 10 3 · Δ MO 2 ) f ˜ .

As f ˜ measures an absolute error and Δ MO 2 is a relative measure, Δ MO 2 is rescaled in Eq. (33). This choice of f yields the expected periodicity for the total mass of microorganisms (cf. Fig. 3 b).

The function f is minimized by applying a gradient descent method with upper and lower bounds for all reaction parameters (cf. Nocedal and Wright, 2006).


3 Results and discussion

In this section, results are presented. In Section 3.1, the estimated reaction parameters are reported. Additionally, a sensitivity analysis with respect to these parameters is performed. Section 3.2 compares the model with experimental data. In Section 3.3, the effectiveness of the reactor is discussed. In Section 3.4, the reaction parameters are studied in detail while Section 3.5 investigates the total amount of methane, which could be generated from the measured quantity of acids, and compares this amount with experimental data.

Table 2 shows the model parameters which are known from the outset. The density of the plastic tower packing, ρ PTP s, is chosen according to the technical data sheet provided by the manufacturer. The density of microorganisms, ρ MO s, is computed by assuming that a microorganism is of cylindrical shape with a length of 0.764 · 10 - 6 m, a diameter of 1 · 10 - 6 m and an average weight of 6.55 · 10 - 16 kg. These values are taken from Garrity et al. (2001) and experiments. The value for D is chosen as the diffusion coefficient from acetate in water multiplied with the unit tensor (Cussler, 1997).

For μ the viscosity of water is used. Due to the chosen boundary conditions the choice of K does not influence the computation. For other boundary conditions, e.g., nonuniformly distributed inflow, this would not be the case and K should be included in the parameter estimation. Furthermore, simplification to the mathematical model are discussed in Section 3.6 and an outlook is presented in Section 3.7.


3.1 Parameter estimation and sensitivity analysis

The fitness function f (cf. Eq. (33)) was minimized and the estimated values for the reaction parameters are reported in Table 2. The results of the sensitivity analysis are shown in Fig. 4 . Apparently, the parameters { k m,Ac , Y Ac , k dec , MO max , K S Ac } have a strong influence on the fitness function, since small changes of these parameters cause a strong change in f. The parameter MO max has the highest sensitivity, f ac,MO the lowest. Nevertheless, it is essential that all reaction parameters are included in the model. On the other hand the relative change in the fitness function caused by a change of f ac,MO is very low. The reason for this behavior is that f ac,MO is at its upper bound. A further increase of f ac,MO would destroy mass conservation.


3.2 Comparison of model and experiment

This section investigates five experiments, each of which lasted 21 d. The inflow of acetate at the top plate of the reactor was measured and implemented in the model. The outflow was then computed and compared to experimental data. The results are shown in Fig. 2. The reaction parameters { k m,Ac , Y Ac , K s Ac , k dec , f ac,MO , MO max } were estimated with respect to four experiments (Fig. 2a–d) simultaneously. The model predicts accurately the outflow of acetate in these four experiments.

Although the reaction parameters were not estimated with respect to experiment e shown in Fig. 2, the model is capable of predicting very accurately the outflow of acetate with the same set of parameters. This test proves that the parameters used are frame independent and that the model is sound in this respect, i.e., the same set of parameters can be used for simulations of similar experiments.


3.3 Effectiveness of the reactor

Fig. 3 shows the local methane production P CH 4 ( t , x ). In an effective reactor, the local CH_4 production should everywhere be equal to its maximum leading to a constant P CH 4 ( t , x ) in space. Fig. 3a shows that in the beginning (t < 2 d) most of the methane is produced in the upper part of the reactor and, therefore, the lower part of the reactor is not used effectively. At day 12 (Fig. 3a, t = 12 d) P CH 4 ( t , x ) is almost constant. The whole reactor is used for methane production and is thus working effectively. At the end of the experiment (Fig. 3a, t = 20 d) the lower part of the reactor is again not working effectively. Fig. 2 shows that the inflow of acetate is very small at the beginning and at the end of each experiment. In this case most of the acetate is consumed in the upper part of the reactor leading to a shortfall of acetate in the lower part of the reactor. Such a shortfall leads to a noneffective reactor. On the other hand, if acetate inflow is large enough ( > 4 kg / m 3 / h ), acetate will reach the lower part of the reactor and will be consumed there. In this case methane production is equally distributed within the reactor, and the reactor is working effectively.

As it can be seen in Fig. 3 the lower part of the reactor is not used very effectively most of the time. In order to optimize methane production the lower part of the reactor needs to increase its methane production. This can be achieved by improving environmental conditions for microorganisms, e.g., by using better filling material in the lower part.


3.4 Reaction parameters

The reaction parameters can be divided into two different groups. The first group consists of { k m,Ac , Y Ac , k dec }. These parameters influence the outflow of acetate during the whole experiment. This means that changing any of these parameters will change acetate outflow in all time intervals. On the other hand, the parameters { K s Ac , MO max } influence acetate outflow only under certain circumstances.Remark 3.1 For small concentrations of acetate ( C Ac l ≪ K s Ac ) the following holds: FORMULA: C Ac l K s Ac + C Ac l ≪ 1 . Remark 3.2 For a large population of microorganisms ( C MO s ≈ MO max ) the following holds: FORMULA: 1 - C MO s MO max ≪ 1 .

Fig. 3b shows the total mass of microorganisms within the anaerobic filter. For time t ∈ [10 d, 15 d] the mass reaches a maximum. Within this time interval, the influence of MO max on acetate outflow is maximal. If MO max is decreased the population maximum will be lower and the consumption of acetate will decrease. Hence, the outflow of acetate will increase within this time interval.

Fig. 2d shows that the total inflow of acetate is very low for t > 18 d. In this case, the parameter K s Ac influences acetate outflow. Increasing K s Ac will inhibit uptake of acetate and, therefore, increase the outflow of acetate.

By considering Eq. (23), the doubling time t d and the maximal specific growth rate of the microorganisms, μ max, can be computed as follows: FORMULA: μ max = k m,Ac Y Ac - k dec = 2.48 · 10 - 3 h - 1 = 5.95 · 10 - 2 d - 1 FORMULA: t d = ln ( 2 ) μ max = 11.649 d. Additionally, k dec = 4.16 · 10 - 4 h - 1 = 0.009984 d - 1 was found to be the optimal value to minimize the fitness function f. These values are according to literature Stams et al. (2003) and Conklin et al. (2005).


3.5 Distribution of anaerobic digestion phases to reactor stages

In Section 2.1 the biogas reactor was described as a two-phase anaerobic-digester. The first stage is the hydrolysis reactor and the second stage is the anaerobic filter. The anaerobic digestion consists of five different phases. The first phase (hydrolysis) takes place in the hydrolysis reactor. The third and forth phase (acetogenesis and methanogenesis) mainly take place in the anaerobic filter. In order to find out where the acidogenesis takes place, the total potential of methane formation from the measured organic acids has to be considered and compared to the methane formation from the experiments. In Table 3 the total methane formation potential from organic acids within the anaerobic filter is in average only about 61% of the measured methane. This means that a large fraction of acidogenesis has to take place in the anaerobic filter. In order to study methane formation in detail, further experimental data about organic substances in the inflowing and outflowing liquid of the anaerobic filter need to be measured and included into the mathematical model.


3.6 Remarks about simplifications of the model

This section deals with simplification to the mathematical model concerning local concentrations of carbon dioxide and methane.

The determination of the amount of carbon dioxide present in the filter should be studied in conjunction with the variation of pH, which, in turn, necessitates solving a set of algebraic equations coupled with the partial differential equations describing balance laws. On the other hand, it can be observed that the pH in the experiments fluctuates slightly about the mean value of 7.9. This observation can be used in order to drop the algebraic equations determining the value of pH, and disregard the balance laws associated with carbon dioxide. Notwithstanding, the reaction terms by which carbon dioxide is produced are retained so that the global balance of mass of the filter is not violated.

Furthermore, it is more interesting to determine the net production of methane rather than studying its motion through the filter. The desired information can be gained entirely through the definition of the reaction terms that describe the production of gas at the expenses of the liquid phase, provided these terms are made independent of the methane concentration in the filter. In this respect, considering an equation for the flow of methane would not add any useful knowledge to the mathematical model. This, in general, does not authorize to eliminate such an equation, because high concentrations of methane (which forms bubbles in the filter) may influence the flow of the liquid phase and the transport of acetate, which, in turn, affect the production of methane itself. A considerable simplification can be achieved by assuming that the total volume of the gas bubbles is small enough as compared to the volume of liquid and solid, and the motion of the gas does not have appreciable influence on liquid flow. These hypotheses, although being quite strong in general, seem to have no dramatic consequences on the final results, which are in good agreement with experimental observations (cf. Fig. 2).


3.7 Outlook

In the mathematical model the solid and liquid phase are considered as separate phases leading to information about local concentration of solids (plastic tower packing and microorganisms) and liquids (water and acetate). Gases are only considered by means of production rates. Therefore, no information about local concentration of gases can be extracted from the model. To include local concentration of gases into the model, a third phase needs to be introduced. This is typically performed by dividing the pore space into a liquid part with a volume fraction S l and a gas part with a volume fraction S g ≔ 1 - S l. The gas phase then has a separate pressure p g. Let the gas phase P g be defined as FORMULA: P g ≔ { CH 4 , CO 2 } . The mass fraction of methane is denoted by ω CH 4 g and the mass fraction of carbon dioxide within the gas phase by ω CO 2 g. The apparent mass of the gas phase ρ g is then given by FORMULA: ρ g = ρ CH 4 g ω CH 4 g + ( 1 - ω CH 4 g ) ρ CO 2 g . ρ CH 4 g is the density of methane and ρ CO 2 g is the density of CO_2. The densities ρ CH 4 g and ρ CO 2 g depend on the ambient pressure p g, the temperature and the volume fraction S g. The new set of equations then includes the mass fraction of methane. FORMULA: ∂ ( ϕ ρ s ) ∂ t = R l → s - R s → l FORMULA: ∂ ( ϕ ρ s ω MO s ) ∂ t = R Ac → MO - R MO → l FORMULA: ∂ [ ( 1 - ϕ ) S l ρ l ] ∂ t = - ∇ ( ρ l q l ) + R s → l - R l → s - R l → g FORMULA: ∂ ( 1 - ϕ ) S l ρ l ω Ac l ∂ t = - ∇ ρ l ω Ac l q l - ρ l D ( ϕ ) ∇ ω Ac l + R MO → Ac - R Ac → MO - R Ac → CH 4 - R Ac → CO 2 FORMULA: ∂ [ ( 1 - ϕ ) S g ρ g ] ∂ t = R l → g FORMULA: ∂ ( 1 - ϕ ) S g ρ g ω CH 4 g ∂ t = - ∇ ρ g ω CH 4 g q g - ρ g D ( ϕ ) ∇ ω Ac g + R Ac → CH 4 . Implementing this set of equations will be part of our future work.

Furthermore, other substances could be added to the liquid and the gas phase. For example, by adding carbonate, hydrogen carbonate and ammonium to the liquid phase, pH inhibition could be included into the model. By adding other organic acids like butyrate, valerate and propionate to the liquid phase, acidogenesis could be added to the model. In this case the liquid phase P l can be defined as follows: FORMULA: P l = { water, acetate, valerate, butyrate, capronate, ammonium, carbonate, hydrogen carbonate } The model presented in Section 2.2 includes flow and acetoclastic methanogenesis. By including the substances listed above in the liquid phase, and considering a separate phase for the gas, a multiphase flow model is obtained, which is able to account for all major steps occurring in the anaerobic filter, i.e., acidogenesis and acetoclastic methanogenesis.


4 Conclusions

The monod-type reaction kinetics for acetoclastic methanogenesis are extended with an inhibition factor MO max to account for size, shape and number of plastic tower packing. The sensitivity analysis proved that MO max needs to be included in the model. The computed acetate outflow was compared with experimental data and it was shown that the model is frame independent and, therefore, can be applied with the same set of parameters to similar problems. By using information about the local production of methane, the effectivity of the reactor Eff ( t ) is obtained. The knowledge of Eff ( t ) can be used to improve the biogas reactor.