TITLE: Anaerobic co-digestion of food waste and domestic wastewater – Effect of intermittent feeding on short and long chain fatty acids accumulation


1 Introduction

Macau is a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China with a population around 640,000 concentrated in an area of only 30 km^2, considered one of the most densely populated regions in the world. In 2010, around 300 tons of solid waste was incinerated and the half was organic waste [1]. In 2015, almost all the energy consumed in Macau was imported from mainland China with only 15.1% generated own by the Macau Energy Company [2]. Therefore, especially from the regional perspective, it is important to create alternative technologies for a better food waste management and energy generation such as to use anaerobic digestion (AD) for the waste treatment with the simultaneous energy production, reusing food waste (FW) as a resource to produce renewable and eco-friendly energy as biogas. AD has been extensively used in Europe but still only about 3% of biodegradable solid waste has been treated anaerobically [3]. Although FW is a promising substrate for AD due to its high biodegradable organic matter content [4], its long-term mono-digestion is commonly associated with the reactor failure due to nutrient imbalance, short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) accumulation, and excess of macronutrients and lipids [5]. Many researches have been carried out to improve the biogas production performance by applying co-digestion of food waste with other substrates [6–10], with different reactor configurations [11], or the substrate pre-treatments [12,13]. However, almost no research has been conducted with the co-digestion of food waste and domestic wastewater. The anaerobic treatment of domestic wastewater is feasible [14] but cannot be digested alone due to its unbalanced carbon to nitrogen (C/N) ratio [15]. In comparison, when the domestic wastewater is mixed with such easily degradable substrates as food waste, it is suitable for the anaerobic co-digestion [16].

Food waste has a complex composition, made of carbohydrates, cellulose, proteins, and lipids. Although lipids have the higher theoretical methane yield (0.99 L CH_4/g) compared to proteins (0.63 L CH_4/g) and carbohydrates (0.42 L CH_4/g) [17], the most frequent cause for the upflow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) reactor failure is attributable to the long chain fatty acid (LCFA) accumulation/adsorption onto the sludge. The accumulation creates a physical barrier and retards the transfer of substrates and products (biogas) to/from the microbial cells [18], promotes sludge flotation and washout, and inhibits the anaerobic microbial activities, mainly methanogenic and aceticlastic organisms, at low concentrations [19]. Linoleate, oleate, and palmitate are the main LCFAs commonly found in raw materials and wastewaters [20], and they can inhibit anaerobic microorganisms (IC_50) at over 30 mg/L, 50–75 mg/L, and 1000 mg/L, respectively, at the mesophilic temperature range [21,22]. However, this inhibition is considered reversible [18] and some strategies have been considered to overcome the LCFAs accumulation and to improve the reactor activity performance. Co-digestion [17], adsorbent addition [21], intermittent feeding [23], and microbial consortium adaptation by the LCFAs pulse exposure [24] are commonly applied to the AD of high-lipid wastes.

The LCFAs adsorption is an essential process for the lipids biodegradation during the anaerobic digestion of complex fat containing wastewaters. The initial removal mechanism is the lipid adsorption on the sludge followed by its slower biological degradation through β-oxidation mechanism to generate short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) [24–26]. According to Pereira et al. [27], the optimal specific LCFA content that provided the maximum mineralization rate and an efficient methane production was 1000 mg COD-LCFA g VSS^−1 when the reactor was operated continuously. In addition, the transformation of oleate to palmitate was considered a non-limiting step in oleate biodegradation [17]. Kim et al. [28] also observed β-oxidation was the rate-limiting step during LCFA degradation and the lag phase was mainly dependent on the substrate (LCFA) concentration. However, when dealing with complex fat containing wastewaters, a non-feeding period would give the necessary time for the biomass to degrade the adsorbed substrate and would definitely contribute to the UASB reactor operation stability. The intermittent feeding, with different feed/feedless periods, was successfully applied to improve the anaerobic digestion of slaughterhouse [29], dairy [22,30,31], and olive mill [32] wastewaters. Since Chinese food is rich in oil, accounting for 22–31% of the food waste dry matter [34], an efficient food waste digestion is required to minimize the LCFAs accumulation and to improve the AD process in terms of biogas production and methane content. There has been no investigation about the application of intermittent feeding during the anaerobic co-digestion of food waste and domestic wastewater for biogas production, which justifies the need for further studies to better evaluate the effectiveness of this strategy for different substrates to promote a stable digestion process.

This work used a mixture of food waste and domestic wastewater to generate renewable energy (biogas) and to study the performance of UASB reactor first operated continuously at the organic loading rate of 2 g COD/L/d. The efficiency of the developed system was evaluated considering the potential inhibition by the LCFAs accumulation and their effects on COD removal and methane content. The application of intermittent mode (48 h feed/48 h feedless) was also investigated at different organic loading rates (2, 3, and 4.5 g COD/L/d) to reduce the accumulation of LCFAs onto sludge to avoid the decrease of reactor activity.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 UASB reactor setup and operation

The anaerobic co-digestion of food waste and domestic wastewater was carried out using an UASB reactor operated under continuous and intermittent modes. The reactor (working volume, 38 L; Fig. 1 ) had 1.6 m working height and 0.15 m internal diameter. The inside temperature was kept constant to the mesophilic condition (35 ± 1 °C), using water jacket. Nitrogen was purged for 5 min to guarantee the anaerobic environment (dissolved oxygen concentration at ∼0.1 mg/L). The reactor was seeded with sludge (10 L) collected from a local wastewater treatment plant between filter pressing and dewatering processes, followed by the continuous feeding of synthetic wastewater (with COD, 500 mg/L; TN, 40 mg/L; and TP, 10 mg/L), similar to the local domestic wastewater, at the hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 10 days and 35 °C to start up the reactor for the sludge maturation/granulation. The biogas and effluent samples were collected from the top (J) and from the effluent tank (G), respectively. After the sludge maturation process was completed, the reactor was continuously fed with food wastewater at the organic loading rate (OLR) of 2 g COD/L/d at 10-day HRT. COD removal, biogas production, and methane content were monitored daily, and when the reactor performance started to decrease, the intermittent feeding (48 h feed/48 h feedless cycle) strategy was applied to see whether the reactor performance could be recovered accordingly. COD removal, biogas production, and methane content were also measured during the feedless period to evaluate the extension of the adsorbed organic matter stabilization. Alkalinity was added daily as calcium carbonate (CaCO_3, 3500 mg/L) to maintain a stable pH during the reactor operation.


2.2 Substrate and seed culture

The food waste was obtained from the university canteen (University of Macau, China). Around 2 kg were collected on a weekly basis and manually screened to remove plastics, bones, and papers. It consisted of vegetables (30.2%), rice (58.4%), and meat (11.4%) (w/w). It was crushed in a blender (Panasonic, Japan) until a paste was obtained and passed through 3-mm sieve. The processed FW was then mixed manually, weighed, and stored in a plastic container at −20 °C until used. The domestic wastewater was obtained from a local wastewater treatment plant. The food wastewater as the influent feed to the UASB reactor was generated by mixing food waste with domestic wastewater at the ratio of 0.09 (v/v). The reactor was seeded with the activated digested sludge (10 L) collected from the same wastewater treatment plant, between filter pressing and dewatering processes. Table 1 shows the characteristics of domestic wastewater (DWW), food waste (FW), food wastewater (FWW), and the sludge.

Food wastewater refers to the mixture of food aste and domestic wastewater at the ratio of 0.09 (v/v). After the physical pretreatment of food waste to reduce its particle size, the resulting paste as substrates was not favorable to be pumped/fed from the bottom of the reactor. Therefore, food waste was diluted with domestic wastewater to enter the reactor accordingly.


2.3 Analytical methods

The concentrations of COD and ammonia nitrogen were measured by the HACH method (DR/4000U spectrophotometer; Hach, Loveland, CO, USA). Alkalinity, total solids, total suspended solids (TSS), volatile solids, and volatile suspended solids (VSS) were measured according to the Standard Methods [35]. A gas meter using a 2-L water-displacement gas collector was used to monitor the volume of biogas produced daily. The composition of methane (CH_4) and carbon dioxide (CO_2) in the biogas (0.1 mL sample volume) was analyzed by gas chromatography equipped with the thermal conductivity detector (GC-TCD) using a HP-PLOTQ column (30 m × 0.53 mm × 40 μm). Helium was used as the carrier gas. The injector, detector, and column temperatures were fixed at 100 °C, 105 °C, and 60 °C, respectively. The concentrations of LCFAs (oleate, palmitate, and linoleate) and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs; acetate, propionate, butyrate, and valerate) were determined by gas chromatography equipped with the flame ionization detector (GC-FID) using a DB-FFAP column (30 m × 0.32 mm × 0.50 μm). For the analysis of SCFAs, the temperatures of injector, oven, and detector were fixed at 200 °C, 100 °C, and 250 °C, respectively. The LCFAs were analyzed according to Cho et al. [36]. The injection volume for both analyses was 0.2 μL. The gas sample was collected daily using the Tedlar^® gas sampling bag. The liquid samples from one UASB reactor port were also collected daily and filtered (Millipore^® 0.45 μm) to measure the amounts of LCFAs and SCFAs accumulated in the reactor. The measurements for both gas and liquid samples were performed in duplicates.


3 Results and discussion


3.1 UASB reactor startup

The reactor startup and sludge maturation were carried out by feeding the reactor with synthetic wastewater (COD:TN:TP at 50:4:1) similar to the local domestic wastewater composition for 40 days until a stable biogas production (7.1 L in 10 days) was obtained. Almost all the organic matter was removed (removal efficiency, 95 ± 1.6%) and converted into biogas with the remaining probably assimilated into biomass. Methane content and methane production rate were 54% and 0.01 L CH_4/L/d, respectively. The methane yield (0.212 L CH_4/g COD) was within the acceptable limits considering the maximum theoretical value of 0.35 L CH_4/g COD [33].


3.2 COD removal and methane content

After the sludge maturation, the reactor was fed with food wastewater at the organic loading rate of 2 g COD/L/d, following the same operational parameters applied during the reactor startup. The highest COD removal efficiency (80 ± 1.3%) was obtained at the early stage (Fig. 2 ). However, after 2 days, the COD removal efficiency started decreasing and reached 61 ± 1.7% after 10 days. The methane content followed similar trend, with higher values at the early stage (56%) but dropped to 37% after 10 days. The total volume of biogas produced was 89 L, primarily consisted of carbon dioxide. The reactor effluent showed greasy with the sludge washed out after the reactor was continuously operated for 10 days. These characteristics are commonly associated with the adsorption of LCFAs layers onto the microbial surface followed by the reactor activity deterioration in terms of COD removal and methane content [21,23,33].

According to Pereira et al. [18], the accumulation of LCFAs is a reversible process and the sludge could recover its ability, converting the accumulated COD into methane gradually. This is in agreement with the progressive methane production observed after the influent feeding was stopped due to the deterioration of reactor operation.


3.3 SCFAs and LCFAs accumulation

The accumulation of SCFAs and LCFAs, shown in Fig. 3 a and (b), respectively, was monitored daily once these intermediates showed significant influence on the reactor performance in terms of the microbial community dynamics. The SCFAs monitored were mainly acetate, propionate, butyrate, and valerate, while oleate, linoleate, and palmitate were the main representative LCFAs responsible for the reactor performance deterioration, in agreement with previous studies [17,36].

Alkalinity (3500 mg/L as CaCO_3) was supplied daily and there was no substantial pH fluctuation, suggesting the reactor was operated under a sufficient buffering capacity. The SCFAs concentration of more than 6000 mg/L may cause inhibition of the anaerobic digester due to a pH drop below 7 [37]. Wang et al. [38] reported that acetate and butyrate concentrations of 2400 and 1800 mg/L did not promote significant inhibition of methanogens, while 900 mg/L of propionate inhibited the methanogens activity. In comparison, however, according to Frank-Whittle et al. [39], it is not possible to define the SCFAs levels to point out the performance of an anaerobic process because different systems have their own levels of SCFAs that are considered regular for the reactor.

Acetate and propionate were the dominant acids accumulated at the early stage of reactor operation. The accumulation of propionate in the anaerobic process is associated with a low efficiency of the methanogenic phase [40]. According to Hill et al. [41], a definite trend was recognized, suggesting the acetate levels in excess of 800 mg/L or a propionate to acetate ratio greater than 1.4 indicate the imminent digester failure. In the current study, the propionate to acetate ratio was within the acceptable limits (1.22–1.40) until day 4 but increased from 1.63 to 3.33 from day 5–10, further suggesting the reactor was not operated under a stable condition when the influent was continuously fed at 2 g COD/L/d. The accumulation of SCFAs could be associated with the high content and biodegradability of organic matter in food waste. This behavior was already expected based on previous literature where the AD of food waste usually presents a low efficiency by the acid accumulation and the lack of mineral elements [6]. When the ratio of SCFAs to alkalinity was used to assess the AD stability and the system presented a value less than 0.4, it was considered stable [42]. A value between 0.32 and 0.40 was obtained until day 6 and increased to 0.74 when the HRT cycle was completed, suggesting the reactor instability due to the accumulation of SCFAs. Another important reason for the accumulation of SCFAs could be attributed to the adsorption of LCFAs onto sludge, inhibiting hydrogenotrophic and aceticlastic methanogens [22,43], usually depending on the LCFA saturation and chain length, the bacterial type, the sludge surface area, and the LCFA to biomass ratio [17,21,44]. It is also known the LCFA toxicity to methanogens exhibits characteristics of a synergistic process and increases if different LCFAs are simultaneously present in the influent [45].

When Cirne et al. [42] evaluated the effect of the increasing concentration of lipids from 5% to 47% (w/w, COD basis) on the SCFAs profile, all the SCFAs tested (acetate, propionate, n-butyrate, isobutyrate, n-valerate, isovalerate) showed a similar trend for all the lipid concentrations investigated and were not considered the major reason for the lower methane production rate obtained. Instead, the LCFAs (palmitate and oleate) formation/accumulation was the key factor to methane production, in agreement with the results obtained in this study. Palmitate was the only LCFA detected and its concentration did not change substantially until day 7, and the oleate and linoleate accumulation started to occur after 7 days. The accumulation of palmitate was previously reported and it is well known this LCFA is the primary detected intermediate from the linoleate and oleate degradation [18,19,33]. Further degradation of palmitate through the β-oxidation mechanism in a continuous mode is hard to occur due to the inhibitory presence of other LCFAs such as oleate [18,27], which could explain the increase of palmitate concentrations after 7 days when other LCFAs were also detected and accumulated in the reactor. The increasing concentrations of oleate and linoleate after 7 days beyond the concentrations usually associated with the anaerobic microbial inhibition (over 30 mg/L and 50–75 mg/L for linoleate and oleate, respectively) [21,22], the increasing ratios of SCFAs to alkalinity, and the decreasing COD removal and methane content prove that an excessive accumulation of LCFAs caused detrimental effects on the UASB reactor performance. The accumulation of oleate and linoleate after 7 days may also be correlated with the high organic overloads which contributed to the inhibition of microorganisms associated with the LCFAs β-oxidation mechanism. This result is also confirmed by the previous study [46] where β-oxidation was the rate-limiting step in LCFA degradation and the self-inhibition was clearly observed during the oxidation of unsaturated (oleate and linoleate) and saturated (palmitate and stearate) LCFAs.


3.4 Ammonia-nitrogen accumulation

The ammonia-nitrogen concentration was not that high (at 50–350 mg/L) when the reactor was operated at 10-day HRT and 2 g COD/L/d OLR, compared to the concentrations commonly found in the mesophilic stressed reactors with non-adapted (at 1700–1800 mg/L) and adapted (at 5000 mg/L) inocula [47]. Since the percentage of meat (11.4%) in the food waste used in this study is not that substantial, the breakdown of protein would not generate the high ammonia-nitrogen concentrations that would cause the reactor failure. Therefore, this parameter was not considered to have a major role in the AD efficiency for the mixture of food waste and domestic wastewater (0.09, v/v).


3.5 Effect of intermittent feeding mode application

The effect of intermittent feeding operation was investigated to minimize the LCFA accumulation while the feeding was stopped for a certain period of time. The feedless period was crucial for the biodegradation of the adsorbed substrate to occur considering the slow LCFAs biodegradation kinetics. The intermittent feeding cycle (48 h feed/48 h feedless) was chosen based on the results obtained when the reactor was continuously operated with an organic loading rate of 2 g COD/L/d, where the highest COD removal and methane content were reached within 2 days. An extension of the cycle length would not be beneficial to the UASB reactor performance. Prolonging the feed period would certainly bring such undesirable operational problems as the sludge flotation and washout due to the severe organic matter accumulation in the sludge bed. An increase in the feed/feedless cycle would extend the anaerobic treatment considerably even though it might not be that much favorable/interesting for the industrial scale application.


3.5.1 Biogas production

Fig. 4 shows COD removal and methane content for different organic loading rates (OLRs) applied when the reactor was operated under the intermittent mode. The total biogas produced was 143, 189, and 288 L for the OLRs at 2, 3, and 4.5 g COD/L/d, respectively. The methane content reached 58% and was kept relatively stable with the increasing OLR. The methane production rate of 0.25 L CH_4/L/d was achieved at the early stage when the higher OLR was applied. Especially at 2 g COD/L/d OLR, the biogas production was superior when the intermittent mode strategy was applied compared to the continuous mode, further suggesting the intermittent feeding mode promoted the degradation of fat matters more effectively and the inhibition observed in the continuous mode could be recovered accordingly. The feedless period was important to the degradation of the organic matter adsorbed on sludge during the feeding period and allowed a relatively stable reactor operation at the OLR higher than 2 g COD/L/d. The reactor stability, in terms of the COD conversion to methane, was also observed in previous studies treating wastewaters with high content of fat matters [22,30]. According to Nadais et al. [31], a longer feedless period resulted in a higher efficiency on the complex substrates removal due to the biomass adaptation. In comparison, a balance between the beneficial effects of longer non-feeding periods and the inhibition generated by the high lipids in the feeding should also be considered [23]. The 48 h feed/48 h feedless cycle introduced in this study seemed a promising alternative to treat real food wastewater. However, further studies are still necessary to better evaluate the application of intermittent feeding to treat different mixtures of food waste and domestic wastewater at higher organic loading rates.


3.5.2 SCFAs and LCFAs accumulation

The concentrations of SCFAs accumulated in the reactor decreased significantly when the intermittent mode was applied, especially in case of propionate (Fig. 5 a), suggesting a gradual recovery of microbial activity (aceticlastic and hydrogenotrophic methanogens), as also suggested by Cirne et al. [42]. Propionate is considered an important intermediate commonly accumulated in the anaerobic digestion of complex organic matter [48]. The obtained results are also in accordance with the previous study [31] where the feedless period was necessary to lower the SCFA accumulation occurred in the feed period. The sharp increase of acetate accumulation when the OLR was 3 g COD/L/d could be associated with the simultaneous accumulation of oleate, which is in agreement with the previous study [22], where the presence of 30 mg/L linoleate promoted the complete inhibition of aceticlastic methanogenesis. However, the acetate concentration started to decrease when linoleate was oxidized to palmitate at 4.5 g COD/L/d OLR, suggesting the byproduct of linoleate oxidation did not inhibit the acetate consumption at the concentration levels detected. The recovery of the reactor activity may be attributable to two major facts, the mineralization of the adsorbed organic matter onto the sludge and the enrichment of specific microbial populations during the mineralization process degrading SCFAs more effectively. These facts were also observed in the previous study [18] where a considerable increase of the activity of sludge was observed in the presence of acetate, butyrate, and H_2/CO_2 after the exhaustion of the biomass-associated LCFA.

Palmitate was the major LCFA accumulated and its concentration was kept stable during the OLR increase from 2 to 3 g COD/L/d (Fig. 5b). Linoleate started to accumulate in reactor but was further degraded to palmitate by β-oxidation, an energetically favorable process [19], suggesting the intermittent feeding is a good strategy to prevent the excessive accumulation of LCFA onto the sludge bed. The improvement of the reactor performance after the application of the intermittent feeding strategy is clear. The accumulation caused by the LCFA adsorption could be alleviated during the feedless period, suggesting that an adapted microbial community more efficient on the degradation of LCFAs was gradually generated. This was also shown in the previous study [33] where the biomass was successfully adapted to olive mill effluent through the subsequent contact with LCFAs by alternating periods of continuous and batch feeding.


4 Conclusions

The high lipid content in Chinese food is considered a promising substrate for methane generation, even though the accumulation of LCFAs would follow. The increasing concentrations of oleate and linoleate were observed after 7 days, which were associated with the anaerobic microbial inhibition. The increasing ratio of SCFAs/alkalinity and the decreasing COD removal and methane content are evidences that an excessive accumulation of LCFAs caused detrimental effects when the UASB reactor was operated continuously. An adequate implementation of operational strategies is crucial to maintain the reactor stability/activity. The intermittent feed (48 h feed followed by 48 h feedless) was a good strategy to treat real food wastewater at the OLR of 2 g COD/L/d. After one reactor cycle, the COD removal efficiency and methane content for the continuous and intermittent modes were 61 ± 1.7% and 37% and 82 ± 1.1% and 58%, respectively. The feedless period reduced the accumulation of fat matters onto the sludge, improved the biological conversion, and increased the methanization, compared to the continuous mode. The intermittent mode promoted the degradation of fat matters more effectively and the inhibition observed in the continuous mode could be recovered accordingly and allowed a relatively stable reactor operation at the OLRs higher than 2 g COD/L/d. The COD removal efficiency and methane content for the OLRs at 3 and 4.5 g COD/L/d were 75 ± 0.9% and 56% and 62 ± 1.5% and 51%, respectively. The total concentrations of SCFAs accumulated in the reactor at continuous mode was 1377 mg/L but decreased significantly (to 677 mg/L) when the intermittent mode was applied, especially in case of propionate, suggesting a gradual recovery of microbial activity. The LCFAs accumulation decreased considerably during the intermittent feeding (82, 97, and 120 mg/L at the OLR 2, 3, 4.5 g COD/L/d, respectively), compared to the continuous mode (488 mg/L). The reactor performance when different durations of feed and feedless periods applied will be further explored to better evaluate whether an extension of feedless period would allow a more complete degradation of the adsorbed fat matters at higher organic loading rates. The increased ratio of food waste to domestic wastewater will also be tested for the reactor performance in terms of biogas production and organic removal rates.