TITLE: The role of phase separation and feed cycle length in leach beds coupled to methanogenic reactors for digestion of a solid substrate (Part 1): Optimisation of reactors’ performance


1 Introduction

Anaerobic digestion is an interesting process for agricultural biomass (crops and wastes) because the biogas produced during the process can be used as an energy source. Maize (Zea mays) has been widely used in central Europe as an energy crop due to its excellent methane yields per hectare (Amon et al., 2007; Bruni et al., 2010). In addition, it has a relatively similar composition to many agricultural and food wastes especially when the whole crop material is used, as it includes cellulose, hemicellulose fibres as well as readily available fractions such as starch and protein (Cysneiros et al., 2008; Sauvant et al., 2004).

The relatively high organic dry matter and fibre content of maize (30–50%) and other crops and solid wastes makes stirring difficult and therefore dry reactors such as leach beds offer some advantages over conventional continuous stirred tank reactors (CSTR). A leach bed is a static reactor, which is operated in batch mode, with liquid recirculated through the substrate bed to provide mixing between the substrate and microorganisms. Amongst other advantages, these reactors do not require neither machinery to dilute and homogenise the substrate prior to reactors’ feeding nor the addition of a large amount of water. Without the need of additional liquid, the volumetric methane yields, i.e., the volume of methane produced per m^3 of reactor, can be improved. An additional advantage of leach bed reactors is their simple design while mixing is provided only by a pump rather than stirrers which are a common cause of malfunction in full scale plants (Hopfner-Sixt and Amon, 2007).

As the leach bed reactor is operated at a high initial loading rate, the digestion of substrates like maize may be difficult because there is a relatively high portion of easily degradable materials. These can be converted rapidly into intermediate compounds, mainly volatile fatty acids (VFA), leading to a pH drop and inhibition of microorganisms which is the most common cause of reactors’ failure (Lettinga, 1995). To overcome this problem, the process can be separated into two phases with hydrolysis and acidification occurring in one reactor and acetogenesis and methanogenesis occurring in a second one (Ghosh and Klass, 1978). Two-phase systems have been used for the digestion of diverse wastes such as sewage sludge, food and municipal solid wastes (MSW) and the system’s configuration included diverse reactors’ designs such as CSTRs and hybrid reactors (Xu et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2011). The configuration of a two-phase system with a leach bed coupled to a high-rate anaerobic digester has been used previously by other researchers in the digestion of solid substrates such as grass, sugar beet, fruit, vegetable waste and MSW (Cirne et al., 2007; Lehtomäki and Björnsson, 2006; Mata-Alvarez et al., 1993; Nizami et al., 2010; Selling et al., 2008; Viéitez and Ghosh, 1999). The digestion of maize with this type of system has not been studied with the exception of two published work by Selling et al. (2008) and Cysneiros et al. (2011), which however, aimed to the evaluation of the heavy metal removal efficiency of the process and the study of the different trophic stages of the system, respectively. In all the above mentioned work on this type of process, the two-phase system has been operated in the same way as initially proposed by Ghosh (1984). Although the two-phase system operated in this way has been shown to have advantages over the single-phase reactors, such as stability and higher heavy metal removal efficiency, it has not been optimised to achieve higher volumetric loading rates and methane yields.

In this work, the leach beds were operated at different batch durations (feed cycles) with the portion of substrate degraded in the beginning of the batch replaced by a new feed of fresh substrate. The feed cycles were consecutive batches throughout a period of 120 days, which allowed the system to be evaluated on a long term run. The digestate and leachate were retained from the previous feed cycle to the next one as a source of acclimated microorganisms to accelerate the reactors’ start up and increase the overall degradation rate. Various modifications were also applied to this two-phase system in an attempt to improve its volumetric loading capacity and methane yields. To our knowledge, despite previous work on this system, this is the first attempt to this direction which could potentially improve its applicability.


2 Methods


2.1 Substrate

The whole crop of maize (Zea Mays) as chopped by the farmer was used as substrate. It was harvested and ensiled on the farm and after collection frozen at −20° and thawed overnight before its use in the experiments. The substrate had a total solids (TS) content of 32.1%, a volatile solids content and (VS) 30.5% and pH of 4.0. On a dry weight basis, the fibre content comprised of 35.3% neutral detergent fibre and 21.5% of acid detergent. The elemental composition was C 45.98%, N 1.11% and H 6.51% on a dry weight basis. The starch content was 30.3%, protein was 7.8% and the neutral detergent-cellulase gamannase digestibility was 66.7%.


2.2 Reactors configuration

The experiment was run with four leach bed reactors connected to high rate anaerobic reactors (anaerobic filters: AF or Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket; UASB). The design and operational mode are described below and illustrated in Fig. 1 .


2.2.1 Leach bed reactors

The leach bed reactors were made from a 300 mm section of a 150 mm diameter PVC pipe which was capped at each end to form a closed vessel with a 4-L working volume, from which 3.5 L was the leach bed. This was mounted vertically and the bottom plate was fitted with a drainage tube covered with a stainless steel mesh on which the bed of substrate was supported, this prevented the drainage tube from clogging. The top plate had a port for the escape of gas into a gas collection bag. The leach bed was operated in a downflow mode and this was achieved by pumping the leachate through a tube inserted in the base of the reactor to an inlet tube above the level of the substrate bed.


2.2.2 Anaerobic filters (AF)

Two sizes of upflow anaerobic filter were used in the experiments. The first had a 4-L working volume and the second a 1.5-L working volume; both were made from UPVC pipe with diameters of 100 mm and 62 mm, respectively. The filters were filled with plastic media for biofilm attachment. Prior to the beginning of the experiments, the reactors were inoculated with digester sludge from a municipal waste water treatment plant and then acclimated to the leachate derived from a leach bed reactor digesting maize.


2.2.3 Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB) reactors

The UASB reactors were constructed of 62 mm diameter UPVC pipe with a working volume of 1.5 L. A phase separator system was placed on the top of the reactor to avoid wash out of granules and gas escape through the effluent tube. Prior to the beginning of the experiments, the reactors were seeded with granular sludge from a brewery wastewater treatment plant and then acclimated to the leachate from the leach bed reactor digesting maize.


2.2.4 Operational temperature

Each reactor was heated by means of an external heating coil and lagged with high performance insulation. The temperature of the heating coil was maintained by a thermocirculator (Techne Tecam C-400) operated at 35 °C.


2.3 Experimental set up and operational mode

Two leach bed reactors were operated at a retention time of 7 days, one reactor at 14 days and one reactor at 28 days. At the beginning of the first cycle, each reactor received a mixture of fresh feed and digestate, as shown in Table 1 , and two litres of leachate from reactors operated in previous experiments (Cysneiros et al., 2008).

At the end of the first and subsequent feed cycles the leach bed was drained for approximately 6 h, the wet digestate weighed, and a small sample (∼2 × 25 g on a wet weight basis) taken for TS analysis. Based on the result of the TS analysis the amount of TS destroyed in the previous cycle was replaced with fresh substrate, thus maintaining a constant TS content at every feed cycle start-up. The time taken to carry out the TS analysis meant that the digestate was left overnight in the leach bed in a drained state before the fresh substrate was mixed in and the leachate replaced to start the next cycle. The samples taken for TS analyses were returned to the reactors after weighing.

In one of the 7-day leach beds (b), part of the digestate was removed after TS analysis in order to allow feeding at the same OLR as the 14-day feed cycle reactor whilst still maintaining the TS content constant at every feed cycle start up. In this case, the amount of digestate removed was equal to the difference between the OLR and the TS destroyed during the previous run. Table 1 shows the digestate and fresh substrate contents at start up in all reactors throughout the experiments.

The leachate generated in the leach bed reactor was continuously removed from the bottom and fed at a rate of 2 L d^−1 to a second stage methanogenic reactor. One of the 7-day feed cycle reactors (a) was coupled to an 1.5-L AF and an 1.5-L UASB each receiving half the leachate to allow comparison between the two types of reactors. In this case, the effluents of the two methanogenic reactors were mixed and recirculated back into the leach bed. The 14-day feed cycle reactor was connected to a 1.5-L UASB. The 28-day feed cycle reactor was coupled to a 4-L anaerobic filter and the 7-day feed cycle reactor (b) to a 1.5-L anaerobic filter.


2.4 Sampling and analyses

Solid samples were taken from the digestate at the end of every feed cycle for total solid (TS) analysis. Samples for pH and VFA measurement were taken from the leachate and methanogenic effluent on alternate days. Another liquid sample was collected every day and a composite sample for the duration of one feed cycle was made for total and soluble chemical oxygen demand (TCOD and SCOD, respectively), volatile and total suspended solids (VSS and TSS, respectively) analyses. The biogas produced and collected in the gas bags was measured by water displacement and its composition was analysed every day. The biogas volume was corrected to standard temperature and pressure (101.325 kPa and 0 °C).


2.5 Calculations

The loading rate of one feed cycle was calculated according to the solid destruction of the previous cycle as shown in Eq. (1). FORMULA: TS added ( n ) = TS initial ( n - 1 ) - TS final ( n - 1 ) where TS_added(n) = fresh TS substrate added in feed cycle (n), TS_initial(n − 1) = total TS at start up of feed cycle (n − 1) and TS_final(n − 1) = total TS at the end of feed cycle (n − 1). Solid degradation of one feed cycle was expressed as overall TS degradation and fresh substrate degradation as calculated with the use of Eq. (2) and (3), respectively. FORMULA: TS deg ( % ) = TS start - TS final TS start × 100 FORMULA: TS freshdeg ( % ) = TS start - TS final TS freshadded × 100 where TS_deg(%) = overall solid degradation of a feed cycle, TS_start = total TS in the leach bed at start up, TS_final =total TS in the leach bed at the end of the feed cycle, TS_freshdeg = fresh substrate degradation and TS_freshadded = fresh TS substrate added in feed cycle.


2.6 Analytical methods

VSS, TSS and TS analyses were performed gravimetrically according to the standard methods 2540 G (APHA, 2005). The average rate of TS destruction (g TS day^−1) was calculated at the end of the feed cycle from the initial solids minus the residual solids divided by the length of the cycle. TCOD and SCOD analyses were performed according to the Standing Committee of Analysts (1985).

Volatile fatty acids (VFA), methanol and ethanol were quantified in a Shimazdu 2010 gas chromatograph (GC), using a flame ionisation detector and a capillary column type SGE BP 21 (30 m long, 0.25 mm i.d., 0.25 μm thickness) with helium as the carrier gas at a flow of 190.8 ml min^−1. The GC oven temperature was programmed to increase from 60 to 210 °C in 15 min, with a final hold time of 3 min. The temperatures of injector and detector were 200 and 250 °C, respectively. The volume injected was 1 μl. Prior to GC analysis, the samples were prepared by acidifying to 10% with formic acid and centrifuging in a 2 ml safe-lock microcentrifuge tube in a fixed angle rotor at 13,000 rpm (17,900 rcf) for 10 min (Eppendorf 5417 C).

Gas composition was measured using a Varian CP 3800 GC with a gas sampling loop using argon as the carrier gas at a flow of 50 ml min^−1. The GC was fitted with a Haysep C column and a molecular sieve 13 × (80–100 mesh) operated at the temperature of 50 ^oC.

The t-test for two samples assuming equal variances was used to determine statistical differences between the means of different sets of results. p-values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.


3 Results and discussion


3.1 pH

In the first feed cycle, the pH decreased fast at start up and subsequently increased over the first days in all reactors until it reached 7.0 and remained in a neutral range until the end of the cycle (Fig. 2 ). Subsequently, the runs started at pH ∼ 6.0 and stabilized at ∼6.8 (Fig. 2), which could be considered a pH suitable for a first phase reactor as the optimum range for hydrolysis is considered to be 6.0–6.5 (Arntz et al., 1985). In the methanogenic reactors, the pH remained at around 7.5 throughout the experiments, which was higher than that of the hydrolytic reactors and within the optimum range for methanogenesis (Lettinga, 1995). The result clearly shows that despite the slight variation in the beginning of the feed cycle in some of the leach bed reactors, the pH was stable and remained within the optimum range for microorganisms throughout the experiments. This shows that the system could be operated steadily with no addition of an exogenous buffering agent.


3.2 Substrate degradation

Substrate degradation was calculated at the end of every feed cycle. We observed that longer feed cycles resulted in higher total solids destruction at 47.2% (±4.6), 30.6% (±3.7), 21.4% (±3.2) and 22.6% (±2.9) for the 28-day, 14-day, 7-day (a) and 7-day (b) reactors, respectively (Table 2 ). Comparison of these values showed that approximately 45% and 65% of solids were hydrolysed within the first 7 and 14 days respectively, indicating that the rate of hydrolysis slowed down with time.

As there was slight variation in degradation in different feed cycles of the same length (Table 2), a student t-test was carried out to compare the performance between the reactors. A statistically significant difference was found between 7, 14 and 28-day reactors while no significant difference was observed between the two 7-day reactors. However, on a daily basis, solids degradation in the 7-day experimental reactor was approximately 28% higher than that of the 14-day feed cycle, and 46% higher than that of the 28-day cycle (Table 2). This shows that on a daily basis the solids degradation was higher the shorter the feed cycle. In conclusion, the 7-day feed cycle was the best performing reactor on a volumetric basis as it showed the highest daily solids breakdown, which in practice is associated with higher OLR.

Solids breakdown continued until the end of the feed cycle, but due to its reduced rate with time, a part of the potentially digestible solids was carried over to the next cycle. This increased the nominal degradation of the fresh substrate added at the beginning of the cycle above 100% (Table 2). Furthermore, it also explains this high nominal solids degradation of our system, which surpassed the commonly reported levels of 75% for full scale reactors digesting maize (Hopfner-Sixt and Amon, 2007).


3.3 COD and VFA production in the leach bed reactors

Total and soluble COD as well as VFAs were analysed from composite samples, which represent the average concentrations of the leachate in each feed cycle. The composite sample from the first cycle showed that in the first cycle the leachate concentration was higher the shorter the feed cycle (Fig. 3 ). The two 7-day reactors produced the most concentrated leachate, with an average of 4.5 g TCOD L^−1 and 3.8 g SCOD L^−1 in the 7-day (a) reactor and 4.0 g TCOD L^−1 and 3.6 g SCOD L^−1 in the 7-day (b) reactor (Fig. 3A and B). In the same cycle, the leachate concentration was 2.8 g TCOD L^−1 and 2 g SCOD L^−1 in the 14-day reactor and 1.7 g TCOD L^−1 and 1.3 g SCOD L^−1 in the 28-day reactor. With progressive feed cycles, the leachate became less concentrated in the 7-day (a) and 14-day reactors (Fig. 3A and C). This indicates that the leach beds were becoming progressively more methanogenic and TCOD, SCOD and VFA were converted to biogas inside the reactor, not leaving a surplus to be exported to the methanogenic reactor. The recirculation of the effluent from the methanogenic reactors to the leach beds probably resulted in the continuous inoculation of the latter ones with methanogens. In the other reactors, this occurred to a lesser extent and VFAs, TCOD and SCOD concentrations were relatively steady for the duration of the experiments (Fig. 3B and D). Probably this was due to the higher initial loading in the 7-day (b) and 28-day reactors (Table 1), which led to a fast accumulation of acids in the beginning of the batch, hindering methanogenesis for few days.

Similarly to the TCOD and SCOD results, VFA production decreased after the first cycles in the 7-day (a) and 14-day leach bed reactors while it remained relatively constant throughout the experiments in the 28-day and 7-day (b) reactors (Fig. 3). When the leachates were removed from the leach beds, the VFA concentrations varied throughout the feed cycles, reaching a maximum of 1.7–5.2 g COD L^−1 in the 7-day (a) reactor, 4.0–5.0 g COD L^−1 in the 7-day (b) reactor, 3.0–6.0 g COD L^−1 in the 14-day reactor and 5.5–6.3 g COD L^−1 in the 28-day feed cycle reactor.

Our results show that the leach beds generated a relatively weak leachate to be fed to the methanogenic reactors, which are known to perform optimally with high strength influents with up to 20 g COD L^−1 d^−1 (Lettinga, 1995). In practice, this means that the strength of the leachate from the first stage reactor was not limiting to the second stage one. Since the COD and VFA concentrations in the leach beds leachate were not limiting for the methanogenic reactors, the OLR applied to the methanogenic reactors depended only on the leach bed reactors operational conditions, i.e., the HRT. In practice, this means that when designing the plant, the size of the methanogenic reactor will be determined by the HRT of the leach bed rather than from the COD and VFA concentrations in the leachate. In our case, the methanogenic reactors could be reduced to operate at higher OLRs. Due to operational reasons, larger reactors were not constructed.


3.4 Methanogenic reactors’ performance on COD and VFA removal

The VFA removal efficiency was 100% in all methanogenic reactors throughout the experiments (Fig. 4 ). This confirms that the VFAs concentrations were not limiting to the performance of methanogenic reactors and these could be operated at higher OLR than the one applied in these experiments.

While 100% VFAs removal was achieved in the methanogenic reactors, a small fraction of the COD present in the leachate derived from the leach beds was not degraded by the methanogenic reactors as seen by the TCOD and SCOD removal efficiencies, which were between 90% and 99% in all methanogenic reactors (Fig. 4). The methanogenic reactor coupled to the 28-day leach bed was the most stable reactor, with TCOD and SCOD removal efficiencies of 91% and 92%, respectively. Since the leachate was retained at the end of one feed cycle to start up the next one, this undigested fraction of the COD of one feed cycle was carried out to the next one and therefore it was considered when calculated the reactors’ COD removal efficiencies (Eq. (4)). FORMULA: ε ( % ) = COD inf - COD eff COD inf - COD 0 × 100 where ε = COD removal efficiency; COD_inf = methanogenic reactor influent COD; COD_eff = methanogenic reactor effluent COD; COD_0 = leachate COD in the beginning of the feed cycle.

The results showed that part of the particles and compounds derived from the degradation of substrate were recalcitrant to anaerobic digestion. Increased concentrations of SCOD and TCOD in the effluent of methanogenic reactors through time has been shown when leachate was retained for successive feed cycles in our previous work (Cysneiros et al., 2011). The remaining TCOD fraction could be composed of partially hydrolysed cellulose, i.e., the complete solubilisation did not occur, since it is known that in some cases this compound is only partially hydrolysed by some anaerobic microorganisms (Schwarz, 2001). The remaining SCOD fraction could comprise soluble compounds derived from lignin which are known to be recalcitrant during anaerobic digestion (Fan et al., 1981) but further investigations on the leachate composition would be necessary to state that. Further studies on the composition of the leachate can be an important tool to evaluate if a post-treatment is necessary when disposing of the leachate.


3.4.1 Comparison between UASB and AF performances

Both methanogenic reactors (AF and UASB) connected to the same 7-day (a) leach bed, had similar VFA and SCOD removal efficiencies, while the AF performance on TCOD removal was slightly higher than that of the UASB (Fig. 4A and B). It is possible that the higher concentration of TSS present in the effluent of the UASB was due to the wash out of small granules from the reactor rather than poorer degradation of TSS present in the influent since there was no considerable difference between the methane production in the AF and the UASB (Table 3 ). Our results suggest that both designs would be equally suitable to act as a second stage reactor coupled to a leach bed digesting maize. However, a higher wash out of suspended solids can occur if the UASB design is selected in practice. This problem could be overcome if a shorter HRT is applied to allow higher settleability of the granular sludge.


3.5 Methane production in the two-phase system

The methane yields of the systems were stable through the different feed cycles of the same length throughout the experiments (Table 3). To allow comparison between the different systems operated for several feed cycles, a student t-test was carried out to compare performance on volumetric and specific methane yields. This showed a statistically significant difference between the two 7-day reactors as well as between the 7-day reactors and the 14 and 28-day reactors while no significant difference was observed between the last two reactors.


3.5.1 Volumetric methane yields

Overall, the volumetric methane yield was higher the shorter the feed cycle as it can be seen in Table 4 , which shows the average methane yields of all feed cycles in the different systems. This result shows that on a volumetric basis, the 7-day feed cycle seemed to be the best option. Regarding the 7-day systems, the 7-day (a) with no digestate removal performed better than the 7-day (b) with digestate removal. This probably occurred because of the high loading rate and the short retention time in the 7-day (b), which did not allow the complete conversion of the substrate to methane. A large amount of undigested material was removed from the reactor after a short solid retention time decreasing the methane yields of the substrate. Similarly, Heaven et al. (2008) observed a reduction in methane yields at similar OLRs when the solids retention time was reduced from 10 to 5 days. This means that in a case where a system with digestate removal is selected, a longer feed cycle should be applied to allow further degradation of the substrate.

The highest volumetric methane yield of 0.705 L_CH4 L^−1 d^−1 was obtained with the 7-day (a) feed cycle reactors’ system. This value is low because the methanogenic reactor was larger than necessary as discussed above. Considering that the methanogenic reactors could be operated stably at an HRT of 8 h (Sawajneh et al., 2010), their volume could be reduced to 0.7 l and according to our calculations, the methane yield would increase to 0.839 L_CH4 L^−1 d^−1. This is still low compared to the intermediate value of 1.34 L_CH4 L^−1 d^−1 obtained with another two-phase system composed by a CSTR coupled to an anaerobic filter (Heaven et al., 2008) and similar to the average of 0.83 L_CH4 L^−1 d^−1 (value calculated based on the information provided in the publication) achieved with a conventional single-phase CSTR (Lebuhn et al., 2008). The low performance of our system could be explained by the reduced mixing in the leach beds, resulting in a poor contact between biomass and substrate and therefore in slower solids degradation. However, our LBR is very simple to design and operate as it does not have a stirring system, which increases the costs and is known to malfunction frequently in full scale plants (Hopfner-Sixt and Amon, 2007). To improve mixing in a high-solid reactor, the loop system designed by Koch et al. (2008) would be an alternative at the expense of increasing complexity and costs of the system.

When analysing the volumetric yield, it is important to consider the whole energy plant and not the reactors’ system only. In our case, there was no disposal of digestate and leachate for over 120 days, which would reduce the size of the post-methanation tank. However, this retention of digestate and leachate in our reactors might cause an accumulation of compounds in the system, which may have a negative effect on reactors’ performance in a long term operation.


3.5.2 Methane production: specific yields

While the volumetric methane yield was higher in the shorter feed cycle reactors, the recovery of methane per g TS_added was higher the longer feed cycle (Table 4). This was probably because the substrate was not completely degraded in the short feed cycle reactors while in the long feed cycle, the solids had a longer time to be degraded before the addition of fresh substrate. On a specific methane yield basis, the 7-day reactor showed the lowest methane yield per g TS_added, while the 14-day and the 28-day reactors showed the best performance, with a yield of ∼0.434 L_CH4 g^−1 TS_added (Table 4). These values were higher than the typical value reported for maize (0.365–0.410 L_CH4 g^−1 VS_added; (Amon et al., 2007; Bruni et al., 2010) but this is probably because part of the methane produced derived from the digestate of the previous feed cycle and not only from the fresh substrate. The maintenance of the digestate allowed our system to recover the remaining methane potential from slow degrading compounds in the digestate along with the methane potential of the fresh substrate added.

Under the conditions tested, our system performed better in terms of specific methane yields (0.434 L_CH4 g^−1 TS_added) than the single stage CSTR (∼0.3 L_CH4 g^−1 VS_added; (Lebuhn et al., 2008) and the CSTR coupled to the AF (0.317 L_CH4 g^−1 VS_added; (Heaven et al., 2008). In this case, the application of a two-phase system composed of a leach bed and a high-rate anaerobic reactor would be more suitable from the energy balance point of view.

According to above, the implementation of this system of reactors to full scale operation, should consider that the 7-day feed cycle (a) reactor will lead to higher volumetric methane potential, while the 14-day and 28-day reactors will lead to higher specific methane yields. The longer feed cycle reactor system has the advantage of reducing the frequency of feeding and handling the digestate from the reactors, which can reduce the energy inputs and operational costs. On the other hand, the 14-day feed cycle reactor could provide the same methane yield per g TS_added as the 28-day feed cycle but with a higher volumetric yield, which would reduce the investment costs. The selection of the operational system will depend on the land restriction, costs, the operational complexity, amongst other factors.


4 Conclusions

The system studied in this work performed better than other systems on specific methane yields per g TS_added although its volumetric performance was poorer. Leach beds are simple to design and operate and proved to be flexible, allowing modifications in the operational mode to improve reactor’s performance. For higher specific methane yields, 14-day feed cycles are recommended while higher volumetric yields are achieved with 7-day feed cycles. UASB and AF designs performed similarly on methane yields, SCOD and VFA removal efficiencies but the latter performed better on SS removal and therefore it is recommended as a methanogenic reactor in this system.