TITLE: Demand-driven biogas production from sugar beet silage in a novel fixed bed disc reactor under mesophilic and thermophilic conditions


1 Introduction

The role of renewable energy in energy systems is steadily increasing in Europe and globally. It is conceivable that future power systems will be based on a large share of renewable energy sources which are intermittent and fluctuating such as wind and solar energy. Temporally fluctuating power generation with limited predictability provided by these renewable energy sources will involve the challenge to reliably match power demand and power supply. Thus, services of compensating these fluctuations will become increasingly necessary (Hahn et al., 2014b). Bioenergy, in contrast to other renewable energy sources, has the advantage of being highly predictable and independent from variable weather conditions. Against this background, the production of biogas from biomass via anaerobic digestion has recently received attention due to its considerable potential to balance variable electricity generation (Szarka et al., 2013). Demand-driven biogas supply can be either achieved through on-site storage of biogas during times of negative balancing power demand and biogas utilisation in a combined heat and power unit (CHP) at times of positive balancing power demand; another possibility is a flexible biogas production which can be achieved by variable feeding of the anaerobic digestion system (Hahn et al., 2014a). As additional on-site storage installations are expensive and capacities might be limited by legal regulations, variable substrate feeding can provide benefits in terms of economic and technical feasibility and environmental performance, especially if longer periods of negative balancing power demand appear (Bekkering et al., 2013; Hahn et al., 2014a; Hahn et al., 2015).

Studies on flexible biogas production by variable substrate feeding are limited, as the traditional approach suggests that optimal anaerobic digestion processes require substrate inputs as constant as possible. So far, flexible feeding has been mainly investigated in continuous stirred tank reactors (CSTR) which is the most common type of reactor systems of commercial agricultural biogas plants (Mauky et al., 2015; Mulat et al., 2016; O’Shea et al., 2016). In general, the degree of flexibility depends on the ability to alter the amount of the produced biogas, and on the time it takes to achieve this change in biogas production. This is predominantly influenced by the type of substrate and its chemical composition (O’Shea et al., 2016). In order to provide high flexibility, changes in gas production are usually achieved by variable feeding of easily degradable material such as maize or sugar beet silage (Hahn et al., 2014b; Linke et al., 2014; Mauky et al., 2015). However, this induces the risk of process instabilities and process failure due to excess volatile fatty acid formation as a result of intensive hydrolysis at high punctual loadings and due to the disturbance of the microbial community through quick changes in feedstock supply (Mulat et al., 2016).

One possibility to achieve flexible biogas generation at enhanced process stability is the use of special reactor systems. Application of two-stage reactor systems is proposed for demand-driven biogas production (Hahn et al., 2014b; Linke et al., 2015; Wall et al., 2016). These systems usually include a first reactor (CSTR or leach bed reactor) where the hydrolysis and acidogenesis steps mainly take place, and a second, high-performance reactor (e.g. upflow anaerobic sludge blanket or fixed-bed reactor) where the acid-enriched effluent of the first reactor can be quickly converted into methane (Hahn et al., 2014b; Wall et al., 2016). Enhanced process stability for digestion of the easily-degradable liquid fraction is achieved in the second reactor by microbial biomass accumulation as a result of biofilm formation in granules or on packing material. Biomass retention prevents microbial wash-out and enables high loading rates, short feedstock retention times, high tolerance to shock loads and improved methanogenesis (Hahn et al., 2014b; Mao et al., 2015). However, main drawbacks associated with these systems include the requirement for skilled operation in order to maintain high granule quality, the risk of clogging of the packing material, and the higher complexity of these systems which also leads to higher investment costs (Mao et al., 2015). Thus, a newly developed fixed bed disc reactor (FBDR) and its application for demand-driven biogas generation is introduced and tested in the present study. The FBDR is a single-stage reactor which is suitable for digestion of low-solid feedstocks that still contain particulate matter. It is designed to combine the advantages of a simple single-stage system with the advantages of high process stability and capability to resist shock loads by microbial biomass accumulation within the reactor through biofilm formation on carriers that are attached to a disc stirrer. Simultaneously, the disc stirrer enables agitation and digestion of particulate suspensions without the risk of clogging.

Besides the type and composition of the feedstock, the process temperature may also influence the response of gas production following flexible feeding. It is well known that thermophilic anaerobic digestion (45–60 °C) results in faster reaction rates and a higher productivity compared with mesophilic anaerobic digestion (35–42 °C) (Mao et al., 2015; Weiland, 2010). On the other hand, the thermophilic process might be more sensitive to environmental changes than the mesophilic process (Mao et al., 2015; Weiland, 2010). A comparative investigation on the suitability of mesophilic and thermophilic process temperatures for demand-driven biogas production has yet to be undertaken.

Thus, the aim of the present study is to describe the novel fixed bed disc reactor for the first time, and assess its performance and usability for flexible biogas production. Detailed objectives include(1) the assessment of the methanogenic performance of the FBDR during long-term digestion exemplarily for sugar beet silage, (2) the analysis of the effects of process temperature (mesophilic and thermophilic) on biogas and methane production from sugar beet silage, and (3) the investigation of flexibility of gas formation and process stability at varying punctual loadings for demand-driven biogas supply.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Sugar beet silages and inocula

Sugar beet silage was digested as mono-substrate. During the digestion experiment two different sugar beet silages (sugar beet silage A and B) had to be collected and used due to a limited feedstock storage capacity. Sugar beet silage A was produced in the province Niedersachsen (Germany) and silage B in Brandenburg (Germany). The silages were filled into air-tight 60 L barrels and stored at 4 °C before analysis and feeding to the digesters. Silage A was solely used for start-up of the experiment and the increase in organic loading, while silage B was used for long-term digestion at a constant OLR and for tests of punctual loadings. Before silages were used as substrates for the digestion experiment they were homogenized by means of a hammer mill or an immersion blender which resulted in a reduction in particle size to 1.25 to 3 mm. The C:N:P:S ratio of the sugar beet silages was compared to the optimal ratio 600:15:5:3 as recommended by Weiland (2010). An existing lack of nitrogen, phosphor or sulfur was compensated by adding ammonium carbonate (consisting of equal shares of ammonium hydrogen carbonate (NH_4HCO_3) and ammonium carbamate (NH_4COONH_2)), potassium dihydrogen phosphate (KH_2PO_4) and potassium sulfate (K_2SO_4) (Carl Roth GmbH & Co. KG, Karlsruhe, Germany) to the silages. Further, a trace element solution according to the recipe DSMZ 144 (DSMZ: Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen) was supplemented with a concentration of 0.01 mg per g VS of feedstock as recommended by Abdoun and Weiland (2009) in order to ensure a stable fermentation.

The inoculum used for start-up of the mesophilic FBDR consisted of a mixture of 75% digestate taken from a mesophilic fermentation of sugar beet molasses previously conducted at the ATB and 25% cow manure (LVAT, Groβ-Kreutz, Germany). The inoculum used for start-up of the thermophilic FBDR was a mixture of 75% digestate taken from a thermophilic fermentation of sugar beet molasses previously conducted at the ATB and 25% digestate taken from a commercial thermophilic biogas plant (Seth, Germany).


2.2 Experimental set-up

Two identical FBDRs with a working volume of 57 L each were used in parallel to investigate different feeding patterns at mesophilic and thermophilic process temperatures. The schematic configuration of the experimental set-up is given in Fig. 1 . The reactors made from stainless steel (V2A) were manufactured by Johann Dudek Maschinenbau (Berlin, Germany). The special feature of this reactor type is the construction of its stirrer. The stirrer is equipped with discs which are fitted with carriers at their undersides. The carriers were hollow cylinders made of PE (sliced drainpipe; PCH, Potsdam, Germany), stainless steel or ceramic (Vereinigte Füllkörper-Fabriken VFF, Ransbach-Baumbach, Germany). According to specifications given by the manufacturer, the carriers showed a height and a diameter of 25 mm, and their specific surface area ranged between 190 m^2 m^−3 (ceramic carriers) and 210 m^2 m^−3 (stainless steel carriers). 560 carriers were attached to the eight discs of the stirrer (192 PE carriers, 184 stainless steel carriers and 184 ceramic carriers were used). The diameter of each disc was 293 mm, the distance between the discs was 39 mm. An offset arrangement of the discs and the up-flow operation of the reactors ensured an intense contact between the process liquid and the layers of carriers. Before start-up of the digestion experiment described in the present study, the carriers were used in a nine month enduring fermentation of sugar beet molasses, thus the carriers were already settled by microorganisms.

A peristaltic pump (pump drive 5201, Heidolph, Schwabach, Germany) was used for substrate feeding. Vessels containing sugar beet silage were positioned on scales to control the daily fed amount. The reactors were heated by means of a water jacket to a temperature of either 37 °C or 55 °C. While using sugar beet silage B segregation occurred during feeding, therefore a stirrer drive RZR 2102 control (Heidolph, Schwabach, Germany) with paddle stirrer was installed at the substrate vessels in week 19 to achieve a thorough mixing of the substrate. The volume of the produced biogas was determined using a drum-type gas meter TG 05, and data was logged by means of the software Rigamo v3.1.Ink (Ritter, Bochum, Germany). The measured gas volume was normalized to standard conditions (dry gas, 0 °C, 1013 hPa) as described by VDI (2006). For the measurement of the pH-value and temperature of the process liquid, the probe InPro 4260 (Mettler-Toledo, Gieβen, Germany) fixed at the reactor lid and the pH-meter inoLab pH/ION/Cond 750 (WTW, Weilheim, Germany) were used.


2.3 Operation of the FBDRs

Feeding of both lab-scale FBDRs (mesophilic and thermophilic) was started with an organic loading rate (OLR) of 0.5 g_VS L^−1 d^−1. Subsequently, the OLR was increased to 4 g_VS L^−1 d^−1 in gentle steps of on average 0.03 g_VS L^−1 d^−1. After reaching the OLR of 4 g_VS L^−1 d^−1, it was kept constant for 14 weeks.

During the initial stage of reactor start-up, sugar beet silage was fed manually. With beginning of OLR 2 g_VS L^−1 d^−1, the silage was pumped into the reactors at intervals of 2 h which resulted in 12 feeding measures per day. 11 of these 12 feeding measures per day were carried out automatically, while the last feeding measure was conducted manually in order to exactly achieve the target OLR and balance slight differences in mass of the fed sugar beet silage.

In order to evaluate flexible biogas production, the influence of different feeding patterns on the biogas production rate was investigated on individual days during the long-term digestion experiment. During standard operation the silage was pumped into the FBDRs at intervals of 2 h which corresponds to a punctual loading (L_p) of 0.33 g_VS L^−1 per feeding measure. For analyses of flexibility of the biogas production system higher punctual loadings of 1, 2, 3 and 4 g_VS L^−1 were tested by adding corresponding larger amounts of sugar beet silage to the digesters. These punctual loadings were followed by degradation times without feeding of 6, 12, 18 or 24 h for the L_p of 1, 2, 3 or 4 g_VS L^−1, respectively, in order to keep the daily OLR constant at 4 g_VS L^−1 d^−1. After the degradation time the standard feeding operation with feeding intervals of 2 h was continued maintaining an OLR of 4 g_VS L^−1 d^−1.

For automatically operated feeding with punctual loadings of 0.33 g_VS L^−1 the silage was pumped into both FBDRs with an averaged flow rate of 68 g min^−1 which resulted in a pumping duration of about 3 min. When test series with an L_p of 2, 3 and 4 g_VS L^−1 were conducted, the flow rates of the peristaltic pumps were increased 2- to 4-fold. Thus, pumping durations for an L_p of 1 to 4 g_VS L^−1 lasted about 10 min. Within the first 6 h after punctual loadings, the produced biogas was collected separately in gas bags and was frequently analyzed regarding its carbon dioxide and methane content (Table 1 ).

Each punctual loading was tested twice. Test series were carried out between week 21 and 31 of the digestion experiment. Details on the experimental days when punctual loadings were tested, and on times when gas analysis after feeding of punctual loadings were conducted are presented in Table 1.

During the entire digestion experiment 2 g antifoaming emulsion (Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) were added daily to the FBDRs to avoid heavy formation of foam.


2.4 Analytical methods

In order to evaluate the stability of the biological process, samples of process liquid were taken once a week and analyzed regarding their pH-value, content of total volatile fatty acids (tVFA) and ratio of volatile organic acids to total inorganic carbon (VOA/TIC ratio). The pH-values of the process liquid were measured using pH probes installed inside the reactors. The VAO/TIC ratio was determined according to the Nordmann method (Drosg, 2013). The contents of tVFA (C_2 to C_6) and alcohols (methanol, ethanol, 1,2-propanediol, 2,3-butanediol) were measured by means of the gas chromatograph CP-3800 (Varian Inc, Palo Alto, USA; Permabond FFAP-column: length 30 m, diameter 0.32 mm, film thickness 0.5 µm and OPTIMA WAXplus-column: length 30 m, diameter 0,25 mm, film thickness 0.25 µm, Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany) equipped with a flame ionization detector. The content of lactic acid (LA) was analyzed using a high performance liquid chromatograph (DIONEX ULTIMATE 3000; Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, USA) with an Eurokat H column (length 300 mm, diameter 8 mm, film thickness 10 µm, Knauer, Berlin, Germany) and a refractive index detector. The total solids content (TS_n) was determined by drying at 105 °C according to DIN (2001). As losses of organic compounds that volatilize occur during drying, the TS_n content of the sugar beet silages was corrected (TS_c) as suggested by Weißbach and Strubelt (2008). Volatile solids (VS) and total ammonical nitrogen (TAN) were measured employing the methods of VDLUFA (2012). The total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) was analyzed according to DIN (1993). The determination of carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen and sulfur was conducted applying the elemental analyzer Vario EL III (Elementar Analysensysteme GmbH, Hanau, Germany) as described by VDLUFA (2012). Total phosphor content (P) was analyzed photometrically according to DIN (2005).

The composition of the biogas produced during start-up and standard operation was determined by means of the gas analyzer SSM 6000 (Pronova Analysentechnik GmbH & Co. KG, Berlin, Germany). During the first 6 h of the test series conducted to evaluate flexible biogas production the gas analyzer GA 2000 (Geotechnical Instruments Ltd, Warwickshire, England) was used.


2.5 Calculation of the theoretical biogas potential and biodegradability index

The molecular formulas of the sugar beet silages were determined by dividing the concentrations of C, H, N, O and S by their atomic masses. The contents of C, H, N and S were determined by elemental analysis as described in Section 2.4. The content of O was calculated by subtracting the contents of C, H, N and S from the content of total volatile solids.

The theoretical methane potential (BMP_th) was calculated using the equation described by Boyle (1976) (Eq. (1)). FORMULA: C a H b O c N d S e + a - b 4 - c 2 + 3 d 4 + e 2 H 2 O → a 2 + b 8 - c 4 - 3 d 8 - e 4 CH 4 + a 2 - b 8 + c 4 + 3 d 8 + e 4 CO 2 + dNH 3 + eH 2 S

The biodegradability index (BI) was calculated as the ratio of the measured methane yield to the BMP_th.


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Characterization of sugar beet silages

The chemical characteristics of the sugar beet silages (A and B), analyzed in duplicate, are given in Table 2 . Silage A showed a TS_c-content of 194.4 g kg^−1 while the TS_c-content of silage B was lower and only amounted to 98.8 g kg^−1. Most of the TS contained in the silages were volatile with VS contents of 165.6 g kg^−1 (silage A) and 87.3 g kg^−1 (silage B). The tVFA concentrations of 10.1 and 7.0 g kg^−1, and the LA concentrations of 16.5 and 21.1 g kg^−1 in silage A and B, respectively, were in the ranges reported in literature. According to Weißbach and Strubelt (2008), the chemical composition of sugar beet silage may vary. For the contents of TS_n, tVFA and LA, typical values in ranges between 88 and 207 g kg^−1, 1.7 and 18.7 g kg^−1, and 5.9 and 28.5 g kg^−1 are stated; the ratio of TS_c/TS_n may range from 1.08 to 1.94 (Weißbach and Strubelt, 2008). The ratios of TS_c/TS_n, of silage A and B were small (Table 2) so that the VS only had to be slightly corrected. Silage quality of the sugar beets can be rated as average to good with high lactic acid and moderate acetic acid and ethanol content.

Based on the optimal ratio of nutrients (C:N:P:S) recommended by Weiland (2010), silage A showed a lack of nitrogen, phosphor and sulfur, and silage B showed a lack of sulfur. The BMP_th of silage A and silage B amounted to 427 L_N kg_VS ^−1 and 501 L_N kg_VS ^−1, respectively.


3.2 Methanogenic performance in long-term operation

The biogas and methane yields (Y_B, Y_M) and the biogas and methane production rates (r_B, r_M) determined during the long-term digestion experiment are displayed in Fig. 2 . The lab-scale biogas plants equipped with FBDRs were operated without any remarkable complications and no clogging of the reactor system occurred at any time during the anaerobic digestion experiment. Technical problems of the automatically operated feeding system occurred at the mesophilic FBDR four times during the increase of the OLR (at day 18, 44, 55 and 78). Besides, on day 126 and 127 the feeding of both FBDRs (mesophilic and thermophilic) had to be intermitted for one day because new substrate vessels equipped with stirrers were integrated into the lab-scale biogas plants. The values measured at days when technical complications occurred were not taken into account for evaluation of the methanogenic performance of the reactors.

An OLR of 4.04 ± 0.03 g_VS L^−1 d^−1 was kept stable for 14 weeks (week 19 to 32). During this period sugar beet silage B was used for feeding, resulting in a hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 22 days. Excluding an adaption period of 2 weeks, biogas yields amounted to 800 ± 16 L_N kg_VS ^−1 (mesophilic) and 823 ± 22 L_N kg_VS ^−1 (thermophilic), based on weekly averages over a period of four hydraulic retention times. High methane yields close to the theoretical methane potential were achieved at both FBDRs, showing values of 449 ± 9 L_N kg_VS ^−1 (mesophilic) and 462 ± 12 L_N kg_VS ^−1 (thermophilic). The average methane concentrations in the biogas was about 56% in both FBDRs. The biodegradability indices of carbohydrates in commercial biogas plants lie at about 85% (VDI, 2006). Thus, biodegradability indices of silage B reached high values of 90% (mesophilic digestion) and 92% (thermophilic digestion), averaged over the operational period with constant OLR of 4 g_VS L^−1 d^−1. The r_B showed values of 3.23 ± 0.07 L_N L^−1 d^−1 (mesophilic) and 3.32 ± 0.09 L_N L^−1 d^−1 (thermophilic); the r_M amounted to 1.81 ± 0.04 L_N L^−1 d^−1 (mesophilic) and 1.86 ± 0.05 L_N L^−1 d^−1 (thermophilic).

Compared with previously published results, a high methanogenic performance was attained during anaerobic digestion of sugar beet silage in the present study using the FBDRs. Biogas potentials ranging from 730 to 770 L_N kg_VS ^−1, biomethane potentials ranging from 340 to 420 L_N kg_VS ^−1 and average methane contents in biogas from sugar beet silage between 46 and 53% are typically reported from batch anaerobic digestion tests (Allen et al., 2016; Dandikas et al., 2014; Gissén et al., 2014; Herrmann et al., 2016; Weiland, 2010). However, lower biogas potentials of 573 to 588 L_N kg_VS ^−1 and higher methane contents of up to 72% have also been published (Moeller et al., 2015). During continuous anaerobic digestion of sugar beet silage in a CSTR under mesophilic conditions and an OLR of 3.93 g_VS L^−1 d^−1, Ramm et al. (2014) achieved a methane yield of 302 L_N kg_VS ^−1, a methane content of 53.0%, and a methane production rate of 1.18 L_N L^−1 d^−1. Similarly, a methane yield of 292 L_N kg_VS ^−1, a methane content of 52.7%, and a methane production rate of 1.17 L_N L^−1 d^−1 was reported by Suhartini et al. (2014) for the digestion of sugar beet pulp at 37 °C and an OLR of 4 g_VS L^−1 d^−1. In contrast, a higher performance comparable to results of the long-term digestion with FBDRs was gained in laboratory-scale experiments with CSTRs operated at a process temperature of 42 °C by Demirel and Scherer (2008). A biogas yield of 720 L_N kg_VS ^−1 was obtained at an OLR of 4 g_VS L^−1 d^−1 (Demirel and Scherer, 2008). In order to achieve this performance an adjustment of the pH-value by addition of KOH was necessary. The methane contents measured by Demirel and Scherer (2008) varied between 58 and 67%, and the biogas production rate of 2.86 L_N L^−1 d^−1 was only slightly lower than the values achieved in the present study.

Comparison with literature indicates that the FBDR is well suited for anaerobic digestion of sugar beet silage allowing for high biodegradability and methane production. Biofilms formed on carrier materials that are attached to the discs of the stirrer possibly supported methane production. An enhancement in biogas production by application of different types of biofilm carriers has been widely reported in previous studies and is attributed to an increase in the number of methanogenic microorganisms by immobilization on the surface of the carrier material (Singh and Prerna, 2009; Yadvika et al., 2004). Yet, different results on methanogenic performance in literature might not only be caused by reactor operation and the applied reactor system. As the composition of sugar beet silage can vary to a certain extent, the methane production characteristics may also depend on specific chemical characteristics of the feedstock.

In the present study, the thermophilic process temperature enhanced the biogas yield and the methane yield by about 3% compared with mesophilic conditions; however, this increase was in the range of the standard deviation. Thermophilic anaerobic digestion has been found to increase the rates of biogas or methane production before (Buhr and Andrews, 1977). This was confirmed by results of the present study. At thermophilic process temperatures a larger fraction of volatile solids is degraded and converted into biogas in an equal retention time which leads to increased gas yields. However, this difference might not be noticeable at longer retention times, depending on the degradability of the feedstock. Sugar beet silage is a rapidly degradable organic material due to large concentrations of easily convertible organic acids, alcohols and sugars, and a low fiber fraction (Herrmann et al., 2016; Weißbach and Strubelt, 2008). This might be a reason for the comparatively low benefits of the higher process temperature in terms of higher gas yields that have been observed in the present study at an HRT of 22 days under steady state conditions.


3.3 Process stability during long-term operation

The process can be regarded as stable during the whole experimental period while keeping the OLR constant at 4 g_VS L^−1 d^−1. This is indicated by tVFA concentrations and the VOA/TIC ratios determined from weekly sampled process liquid. The values of tVFA stayed in a constant range below 3 g L^−1 in both FBDRs, as presented in Fig. 3 . VFAs mainly consisted of acetic acid; the acetic to propionic acid ratio ranged between 3 and 31, or the content of propionic acid was below the detection limit of 0.02 g L^−1. In tendency, the observed VOA/TIC ratios remained below 0.3 (Fig. 3). tVFA concentrations below 4 g L^−1, an acetic to propionic acid ratio above 2, and a VOA/TIC ratio below 0.3 usually reflect adequate process conditions without inhibition (Drosg, 2013).

At the end of the digestion experiment (week 32) the contents of TKN in the process liquid showed values of 2.94 g kg^−1 (mesophilic) and 2.41 g kg^−1 (thermophilic), while TAN concentrations within both reactors were determined as 0.81 g kg^−1 (mesophilic) and 1.40 g kg^−1 (thermophilic) (Fig. 3). TAN levels stayed well below 3 to 5 g L^−1 which are commonly regarded as inhibitory (Chen et al., 2008; Drosg, 2013). pH-values were slightly higher at thermophilic process conditions compared with the mesophilic operated FBDR (Fig. 2). Higher TAN levels under thermophilic conditions are in agreement with results of a study on anaerobic digestion of sugar beet pulp conducted by Suhartini et al. (2014). They attributed the correlation between process temperature and TAN to an increased protein degradation under thermophilic temperature conditions. This probably resulted in higher alkalinity and slightly higher pH-values at increased process temperature (Suhartini et al., 2014). Higher buffering capacity led to an enhanced process stability at an organic loading rate of 5 g_VS L^−1 d^−1 in the study of Suhartini et al. (2014); however, limits of organic loading were not investigated in the present study.

Overall, it can be concluded from results of the chemical analysis of the process liquids that no inhibitory effect influenced the stability of the digestion process in both FBDRs (mesophilic and thermophilic) under steady state conditions.


3.4 Methanogenic performance at different punctual loadings

Feeding with different punctual loadings was tested in order to simulate variable biogas production for demand-driven energy supply. The biogas and methane production rates (r_B, r_M), which were measured after punctual loadings of 1, 2, 3 or 4 g_VS L^−1 are presented in Tables 3 and 4 . Daily feeding was adjusted by applying different feeding patterns while keeping a constant total daily OLR of 4 g_VS L^−1 d^−1. Results are compared with the standard feeding procedure (L_p 0.33 g_VS L^−1 fed every 2 h, Tables 3 and 4).

Biogas and methane production in the FBDRs directly responded to the punctual feedstock loadings. After feeding of sugar beet silage, the biogas and methane production rates increased immediately and normally started to decline 15 min later. The only exception was observed for the punctual loading of 1 g_VS L^−1 at the thermophilic process temperature when the maximum methane production rate was reached 30 min after starting the punctual loading (Table 4). Maximum methane production rates of 2.68 ± 0.08 L L^−1 d^−1 (mesophilic) and 2.90 ± 0.19 L L^−1 d^−1 (thermophilic) were noted for the standard feeding operation, based on 15-min measuring intervals. Increased punctual loadings resulted in 0.4 to 3.5-fold higher maximum methane production rates of 3.68 to 12.04 L L^−1d^−1 and 4.17 to 10.95 L L^−1 d^−1 under mesophilic and thermophilic process conditions, respectively. A similar increase in gas production to a fourfold level was achieved by Mauky et al. (2015) by means of a variable feeding regime of maize and sugar beet silage in a CSTR, but an only 1.9-fold increase was realized by Linke et al. (2015) in a two-stage system applying flexible feeding of maize silages.

By pumping sugar beet silage into the FBDR, biogas production was enhanced to a larger extent than the methane production. This can be explained by high concentrations of acids that were formed directly after feeding sugar beet silage. Microorganisms inside the reactor immediately start hydrolytic degradation processes resulting in acids production if they get into contact with easily convertible organic compounds of the silage. These acids led to a decrease in pH-value, which caused the degradation of carbonic acid to gaseous carbon dioxide. The release of carbon dioxide increased the biogas production. The production of acids after feeding silage was indicated by a decreasing pH-value. During standard feeding operation the pH-value only decreased by 0.03 units directly after feeding. In contrast, at higher punctual loadings the pH-value decreased by up to 0.39 units (Tables 3 and 4). Yet, no long-term decrease in pH-value or accumulation of VFAs was detected after feeding punctual loadings (Fig. 2).

Since methanogenesis begins later then the hydrolytic processes which cause the release of higher amounts of carbon dioxide, the methane content in the biogas partly dropped below 40% (Tables 3 and 4) after feeding. For example, 45 min after the punctual loadings of 3 and 4 g_VS L^−1, biogas with a methane content of 38 and 29% (mesophilic) or 39 and 33% (thermophilic) was produced. The methane content in the biogas increased to values above 40% again within 5 to 6 h (mesophilic) or 3 to 4 h (thermophilic) after feeding.

The feeding of high punctual loadings of sugar beet silage seemed to influence the biogas yield positively but an enhancing effect on the methane yield was not notable. Methane yields in a range between 418 and 440 L_N kg_VS ^−1 (mesophilic), and 472 and 486 L_N kg_VS ^−1 (thermophilic) were observed. The highest biogas yields were obtained at punctual loadings of 3 and 4 L_N kg_VS ^−1. In comparison to the standard feeding operation, biogas yields were 4 and 8% (mesophilic), and 10 and 12% (thermophilic) higher. The biogas yields of the standard feeding operation measured at day 148 and 161 of the digestion experiment were 801 ± 2 L_N kg_VS ^−1 (mesophilic) and 834 ± 15 L_N kg_VS ^−1 (thermophilic). The next day after feeding high punctual loadings (3 and 4 L_N kg_VS ^−1), the daily biogas yields dropped by 5 and 14% (mesophilic), and by 8 and 20% (thermophilic), but the methane content increased to 58 and 60%. The additional yields at days with high punctual loadings seemed to be compensated on the following two days until the methane contents dropped back to their original levels of 56%.

Generally it can be stated, that the FBDR responded very quickly to different feeding patterns. Even at high punctual loadings the fed organic matter could be degraded to carbon dioxide and methane within the same day. Linke et al. (2015) investigated demand-driven biogas production from maize silage in a two-stage system at 38 °C. The maize silage was fed once a day. It was found that the methane production rate adjusted to the varied daily feed with a comparatively long delay of one day. In accordance with the present study, Mauky et al. (2015) observed an immediate and sharp response of the biogas production after feeding sugar beet silage, and a decrease of gas formation within two hours after the last feeding event. In consequence, sugar beet silage seems to be more suitable for a sensitive demand-driven biogas production because the methane production rate can be altered within minutes.

Results on biogas formation after punctual loadings (Fig. 4 ) suggest that the amount and rate of biogas production depend on the quantity of added organic material and can be well controlled and predicted. The amount of the produced biogas increased with higher punctual loading while the velocity of degradation of the added organic material decreased with higher punctual loading (Fig. 4). The thermophilic process temperature was advantageous over mesophilic digestion conditions as, with exception of the punctual loading of 4 g_VS L^−1, a more rapid and higher methane production was observed. Furthermore, the decrease in methane content of the biogas produced after punctual loading and the effects on pH-value within the reactor was less pronounced under thermophilic temperature conditions (Tables 3 and 4).

For the use in a CHP a methane content of at least 40 to 45% within the biogas is necessary. Commonly CHP units work with gas engines or igniting beam engines. In the case of a gas engine lower methane contents in the biogas lead to a non-flammable gas air mixture and the engine would switch off. If biogas with lower methane contents is combusted in igniting beam engines the igniting oil proportion needs to be increased. This causes negative effects on the efficiency of the engine and on waste gas pollution (FNR, 2010). According to the present study, a demand-driven biogas production from sugar beet silage might be ideal for electric power generation with punctual loadings up to 2 g_VS L^−1 because the methane content in the produced biogas always stays above 40%. At higher punctual loadings it is recommended to store the biogas produced after feeding until the mark of 40% methane is reached again. Thus, storage periods of 5 h and 8 h (mesophilic) or 3 h and 5 h (thermophilic) are required after feedings with L_p of 3 and 4 g_VS L^−1. Alternatively, the gas can be mixed with methane-rich biogas from gas storage tanks or upgraded in a gas processing plant first in order to achieve an adequate methane content. As the methane content within the produced biogas also depends on the chemical composition of the feedstock, another possibility would be the use of feedstock mixtures with higher protein or lipid contents that might result in a higher methane concentration (Weiland, 2010).


4 Conclusions

The FBDR system was demonstrated to be well-suited for flexible biogas production from low solid feedstock containing easily degradable particulate matter such as sugar beet silage. A remarkable high methanogenic performance was achieved. Alteration of gas production within minutes through variable feeding enables easily controllable intraday balancing power supply, but temporary decreasing methane contents need to be considered. Thermophilic temperatures are beneficial due to a more rapid response in gas production and a more stable methane content after high punctual loads. Further research should focus on feedstock mixtures, limits of flexibility, and comparison of the FBDR with traditional reactor systems.