TITLE: Nature-based solutions for wastewater treatment and bioenergy recovery: A comparative Life Cycle Assessment


1 Introduction

In rural areas of Brazil, around 50 % of the population does not have access to proper wastewater treatment systems and still lacks safely managed sanitation services (World Bank, 2020). Moreover, Brazil is characterized by a wide rural-urban energy access gap and approximately 30 % of rural households were still living without electricity (Leduchowicz-Municio et al., 2022). Lack of sanitation and modern, affordable energy services are responsible not only for environmental impacts but also for increasing poverty.

In this context, low-cost decentralized wastewater treatment systems are the most common and appropriate solution if compared to conventional activated sludge systems, especially in small communities (<10,000 p.e.) (Noyola et al., 2012). In particular, up-flow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) reactors have been the most used in the region, due to their low-cost of operation and maintenance (Chernicharo et al., 2018a, 2018b). The recovered biogas from the UASB reactors is usually converted into heat using boilers, electricity and heat using combined heat and power plants or even purified into biomethane and injected into the gas grid. In small communities of Brazilian rural areas, the recovered biogas might be also used as a clean fuel for cooking or heating. However, the UASB effluent usually requires a secondary treatment step to remove nutrients and pathogens in order to meet the discharge requirements and improve water quality (Daud et al., 2018).

A study evaluating around 1600 wastewater treatment plants (WWTP) in Brazil, showed that around 50 % used UASB reactors followed by secondary treatments through nature-based solutions, such as trickling filters (TKFs) and polishing ponds (PPs) (Chernicharo et al., 2018a), while constructed wetlands (CWs) were shown to be another suitable option among the nature-based technologies (Sezerino et al., 2015). Trickling filters, also called trickling biofilters, are fixed-bed biological reactors that operate under (mostly) aerobic conditions. Polishing ponds, also called maturation ponds, are shallow ponds where wastewater is treated by natural occurring processes and the influence of solar light, wind, microorganisms and algae. Constructed wetlands are constructed filtration systems with gravel and sand, planted with wetland vegetation (e.g. common reed) (SSMW, 2022).

Among the nature-based solutions, high rate algal ponds (HRAPs) are shallow, paddlewheel mixed, raceway ponds where wastewater treatment is carried out by a consortium of microalgae and bacteria which assimilate nutrients and degrade organic matter (Craggs et al., 2014; Park et al., 2011). During the last decades, these systems have been gaining popularity, since resources might be recovered from the produced biomass. In fact, microalgae grown in the ponds may be harvested and valorized to produce biofuels (e.g. biogas), biofertilizers or other bioproducts. When HRAPs follow UASB reactors, microalgal biomass can be recirculated to the latter and anaerobically co-digested with raw wastewater, increasing biogas production and methane yield by up to 10 and 25 %, respectively (Vassalle et al., 2020). In Brazil, microalgae technologies have shown great potential for wastewater treatment and resource recovery due to the high solar radiation, which enhances microalgae growth and biomass concentration (Singh and Patidar, 2018; Vassalle et al., 2020; Vassalle et al., 2022). Even though the technical feasibility of UASB reactors coupled with HRAPs has already been tested (Vassalle et al., 2020), the environmental benefits of their implementation are yet to be demonstrated.

The aim of this study was to assess, for the first time, the environmental impacts of UASB reactors coupled with HRAPs for wastewater treatment and bioenergy recovery using the Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) methodology. This solution was compared to the UASB reactor coupled with other consolidated nature-based solutions in rural areas of Brazil, such as trickling filters, polishing ponds and constructed wetlands. Moreover, an economic assessment comparing all the scenarios was also addressed.


2 Material and methods


2.1 Wastewater treatment systems design

The LCA and economic assessment compared 4 scenarios composed by UASB reactors followed by different secondary treatment alternatives (Fig. 1 ), namely: i) trickling filter (scenario UASB+TKF), ii) HRAPs (scenario UASB+HRAP), iii) polishing ponds (scenario UASB+PP) and iv) horizontal sub-surface flow constructed wetlands (scenario UASB+CW). To this end, full-scale systems were designed based on experimental data obtained from pilot/demonstrative scale systems of up to 100 m^2 located in the Sanitation Research and Training Center of Belo Horizonte, Brazil (coordinates 19°53′42″ S and 43°52′42″W, 800 m.a.s.l., average ambient temperature 25 °C). These experimental plants along with the results obtained were described in detail by Dornelas et al. (2009) with regard to the TKF, PP, CW, and Vassalle et al. (2020) concerning the HRAPs. The full-scale systems were designed for a population equivalent of 10,000 p.e. and a flow rate of 1500 m^3 d^−1. They all comprised a pretreatment to remove coarse solids (i.e. manual grid, grit chamber and Parshall flume), followed by a primary treatment (UASB reactor) and the corresponding secondary treatment unit (TKF, HRAP, PP, CW).

In the trickling filter and HRAPs scenarios (scenarios UASB+TKF and UASB+HRAPs, respectively), the secondary effluent goes through a gravity settler to separate the biomass (sludge and microalgae, respectively) from treated wastewater, which is discharged into a water body. Some harvested biomass is then recirculated to the UASB reactor and co-digested with raw wastewater in order to increase biogas production (Pontes et al., 2003; Vassalle et al., 2020). In the polishing ponds and constructed wetlands scenarios (scenarios UASB+PP and UASB+CW, respectively), the secondary effluent is directly discharged to a water body (river). The sludge from UASB reactors is dewatered in sludge drying beds and then landfilled together with the pretreatment residues (sand and grid material) (Bressani-Ribeiro et al., 2019). The sludge production in the UASB reactor was 104 kg d^−1 and 357 kg d^−1 for scenario 1 and scenario 2, respectively. For scenarios 3 and 4, sludge production was 96 kg d^−1. In all the scenarios, the biogas produced in the UASB reactor is used in a combined heat and power (CHP) unit. Heat is then reused in the sludge drying beds, as proposed by Rietow et al. (2018), while electricity is sold to the grid. Biogas and methane production in each scenario are shown in Table 1 . A 10 % energy loss in the CHP engine was considered. A yield of 35 % for electricity production and 55 % for heat energy production was taken into account (Vassalle et al., 2020). Table 1 summarises the design and operational parameters of each unit of the wastewater treatment systems.

The effluent quality and treatment efficiency of each scenario were taken from previous pilot-scale studies. For the trickling filter scenario (scenario UASB+TKF), removal efficiencies of 81 % for Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), 87 % for Total Suspended Solids (TSS) and 20 % for Total Nitrogen (TN) and Total Phosphorous (TP) were considered (Pontes et al., 2003; Oliveira and von Sperling, 2002; Von Sperling, 2007). For the HRAPs scenario (scenario UASB+HRAP), removal efficiencies of 67 % for COD, 44 % for TSS, 32 % for TN and an increase of 11 % for TP were considered (Vassalle et al., 2020). For the polishing ponds scenario (scenario UASB+PP), removal efficiencies of 72 % for COD, 70 % for TSS, 44 % for TN and an increase of 12 % for TP were considered (De Assunção and Von Sperling, 2013). Finally, for the constructed wetlands scenario (scenario UASB+CW) removal efficiencies of 94 % for COD, 98 % for TSS, 31 % for TN and 55 % for TP were taken into account (Dornelas et al., 2009).

The amount of sand and grid material removed in the pretreatment was estimated from the literature (Metcalf et al., 2013). On the other hand, the amount of sludge produced in the UASB reactor was calculated considering a solids coefficient of 0.15 kg TSS kg COD^−1 (Chernicharo, 2007).

Biogas production was based on our previous pilot-scale studies (Vassalle et al., 2020). Accordingly, a specific methane production of 0.16 L CH_4 g^−1 VS was considered for the trickling filter, polishing ponds and constructed wetlands scenarios (scenarios UASB+TKF, UASB+PP and UASB+CW, respectively), where the UASB reactor only treats raw wastewater. On the other hand, a specific methane production of 0.21 L CH_4 g^−1 VS was considered for the HRAPs scenario (scenario UASB+HRAP), where microalgal biomass is co-digested with raw wastewater, increasing the methane yield by 25 %. Influent and effluent characteristics, along with biogas production for each alternative, are summarised in Table 1.


2.2 Life Cycle Assessment

The LCA was carried out following the ISO standards (ISO, 2000; ISO, 2006) in order to evaluate and quantify the potential environmental impacts of the investigated scenarios. It consists of four main stages: i) goal and scope definition, ii) inventory analysis, iii) impacts assessment and iv) interpretation of the results (ISO, 2006). The following sections describe the specific content of each phase.


2.2.1 Goal and scope definition

The goal of this study was to determine the potential environmental impacts of the UASB reactor coupled with HRAPs for wastewater treatment and bioenergy recovery in small communities in Brazil. This configuration was compared to other low-cost and nature-based technologies that have already been established in the country. Overall, four alternatives were compared:1) UASB reactor followed by a trickling filter (scenario UASB+TKF); 2) UASB reactor followed by HRAPs (scenario UASB+ HRAP); 3) UASB reactor followed by polishing ponds (scenario UASB+PP); 4) UASB reactor followed by horizontal sub-surface flow constructed wetlands (scenario UASB+CW).

The functional unit (FU) for this study was set as 1 m^3 of treated water, since the main function of the solutions proposed is to treat wastewater. The cradle-to-grave boundaries included systems construction, operation and maintenance of the full-scale systems over a 20-years period (Arashiro et al., 2018 ; Garfí et al., 2017 ; Pérez-López et al., 2017). Input and output flows of materials (i.e. construction materials) and energy resources (heat and electricity) were systematically studied for all scenarios. Direct greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and NH_4 ^+ volatilization associated with wastewater treatment were also included in the boundaries (Søvik et al., 2006). Direct emissions to water were also considered, since treated wastewater is discharged into a water body (river). Regarding the sludge produced in all scenarios, transportation of dewatered sludge to the landfill was also taken into account (20 km - average distance to the landfill in Brazil). The end-of-life of infrastructures and equipment were neglected, since the impact would be marginal compared to the overall impact (Arashiro et al., 2018; Garfí et al., 2017; Pérez-López et al., 2017). Since the studied scenarios would generate by-products (i.e. biogas), the system expansion method was used following the ISO guidelines (Guinée, 2006). In this method, by-products are supposed to avoid the production of conventional products. Thus, the impacts associated with the production of conventional products were withdrawn from the overall impact of the systems (Arashiro et al., 2018; Sfez et al., 2015; ISO, 2006). Specifically, the avoided impacts of using heat and electricity produced by biogas cogeneration instead of heat from natural gas and electricity from the grid were considered.


2.2.2 Inventory analysis

In all scenarios, inventory data regarding construction materials and systems operation were based on the detailed engineering designs performed in the frame of this study (Table 2 ). As mentioned above, treated effluents characteristics were estimated considering the removal efficiencies and experimental results of previous studies. In the case of the trickling filter and constructed wetlands scenarios (scenarios UASB+TKF and UASB+CW, respectively) direct CH_4 and N_2O emissions were estimated using emission factors from the literature (Gutierrez, 2014). NH_4 ^+ volatilization in the HRAPs and polishing ponds scenarios (scenarios UASB+HRAP and UASB+PP, respectively) was estimated through nitrogen mass balance (De Assunção and Von Sperling, 2013; Vassalle et al., 2020). Since heavy metals were not detected in the influent wastewater, they were not considered in any scenario (Dornelas et al., 2009; Vassalle et al., 2020). As mentioned above, in order to estimate electricity and heat production from biogas cogeneration, biogas production obtained in pilot-scale experiments was taken into account (Vassalle et al., 2020). Background data (i.e. data of construction materials, chemicals, energy production, transportation, sludge landfilling) were obtained from the Ecoinvent 3 database (Moreno Ruiz et al., 2020; Weidema et al., 2013).


2.2.3 Impact assessment

This LCA study was performed using the SimaPro® 9 software (Pré Sustainability, 2019). The potential environmental impacts were calculated using the ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint (H) method (Huijbregts et al., 2017). The characterization phase was performed considering the following impact categories: Global warming, Stratospheric Ozone Depletion, Terrestrial acidification, Freshwater Eutrophication, Marine Eutrophication, Mineral resource scarcity, Terrestrial ecotoxicity and Fossil resource scarcity. These impact categories were selected according to the most relevant environmental issues related to wastewater treatment (Arashiro et al., 2018; Cartes et al., 2018; Flores et al., 2019; Garfí et al., 2017; Gutierrez, 2014).


2.3 Economic analysis

The economic assessment was performed by comparing the capital cost (CAPEX) and the operation and maintenance (OPEX) cost of all scenarios. Capital costs included earthmoving, construction materials and equipment purchases (Von Sperling and Salazar, 2013). On the other hand, operation and maintenance costs comprised costs associated with personal, maintenance, repairs transport and energy (electricity and heat) consumption over the lifetime of the systems (Von Sperling, 2007). The surplus electricity generated from biogas cogeneration was supposed to be sold to the grid. Thus, the revenue from the electricity sold to the grid was withdrawn from the overall operational and maintenance costs of the systems.

The capital and operation and maintenance costs were based on the literature for Brazil (von SPERLING, 2014). The published prices (in reais – R$) for the year 2010 were adjusted to current prices (2022) considering the Brazilian National Construction Cost Index (INCC) (correction index used for capital costs) and the National Consumer Prices index (INPC) (correction index used for operation and maintenance). The correction rates (2010 to 2022) for INCC and INPC were 81.46 % and 71.25 % respectively. The costs in euro were converted from the costs in Brazilian reais (R$) using the currency exchange rate from the Central Bank of Brazil (2022).


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Characterization

The potential environmental impacts associated with each scenario are shown in Fig. 2 . The results showed that the HRAPs scenario (scenario UASB+HRAP) was the most environmentally friendly alternative in 4 out of 8 impact categories (i.e. Global warming, Stratospheric Ozone Depletion, Terrestrial Ecotoxicity and Fossil resource scarcity). The trickling filter scenario (scenario UASB+TKF) was the most environmentally friendly alternative in Marine Eutrophication and Terrestrial Acidification impact categories. And the constructed wetlands and polishing ponds (scenarios UASB+CW and UASB+PP, respectively) were the best alternatives in Freshwater Eutrophication and Mineral resource scarcity impact categories, respectively.

Regarding the Global warming impact category, the higher impacts of the trickling filter and constructed wetlands scenarios (scenario UASB+TKF and UASB+CW, respectively) were mainly due to the direct emissions to air (i.e. methane and nitrous oxide gases emissions) and construction materials. These emissions were responsible for 77 % and 38 % of the overall impact in these scenarios, respectively. In the case of constructed wetlands, the contribution of the construction materials accounted for 51 % of the overall impact. Moreover, in the HRAPs scenario (scenario UASB+HRAP) the high impact caused by construction materials use (79 % of the overall impact) is completely offset by the avoided energy due to electricity and heat cogeneration from biogas, since biogas production was higher with respect to the other scenarios as a result of the co-digestion with microalgal biomass. This is in accordance with previous studies which analysed the environmental impacts of HRAPS coupled with anaerobic digestion (Arashiro et al., 2018). In particular, in the HRAPs scenario (scenario UASB+HRAP), the avoided energy was between 4 and 6 times higher compared to the other scenarios (Table 2). Indeed, previous studies observed that the energy balance was always positive when microalgal biomass was co-digested with primary or secondary sludge and the biogas was used to generate electricity and heat (Passos et al., 2017; Vassalle et al., 2020).

Regarding Stratospheric Ozone Depletion and Terrestrial Ecotoxicity impact categories, in all scenarios, the potential environmental impacts were completely offset by the avoided energy generated from biogas cogeneration. It showed that bioenergy recovery from wastewater always improves the environmental footprint of the wastewater treatment systems. As for the Global warming impact category, the HRAPs scenario (scenario UASB+HRAP) was the most environmentally friendly solution, since the co-digestion of microalgae and raw wastewater in the UASB reactor produced a higher amount of biogas compared to the other alternatives. This is in accordance with previous studies that carried out an LCA of HRAPs coupled with biogas production from the co-digestion of microalgae biomass and primary sludge based on a pilot system implemented in Barcelona (Spain) (Arashiro et al., 2018).

As far as the Terrestrial Acidification impact category is concerned, the higher environmental impact of HRAPs and polishing ponds scenarios (scenarios UASB+HRAP and UASB+PP, respectively) was mainly due to NH_3 emissions to air caused by NH_4 ^+ volatilization (89 % and 52 % of the overall impact, respectively). NH_4 ^+ volatilization in algae-based wastewater treatment systems is caused by a high pH. Indeed, when pH is above 9 the balance between ammonium ion and free ammonia tends to shift towards the formation of NH_3, which is very unstable and volatilizes. It is estimated that, in algae-based wastewater treatment systems, 3 % of the removed ammonia is volatile (De Assunção and Von Sperling, 2013). NH_4 ^+ volatilization can be reduced by controlling the pH using CO_2 injection, which can also increase by up to 15 % the production of microalgae in these systems (Arashiro et al., 2018; Solimeno et al., 2019).

With regard to the Freshwater and Marine Eutrophication impact categories, the most environmentally friendly scenarios were the constructed wetlands and trickling filter scenarios (scenarios UASB+CW and UASB+TKF, respectively), respectively. The HRAPs scenario (UASB+HRAP scenario) showed a slightly higher environmental impact compared to the other scenarios, in agreement with previous studies (Arashiro et al., 2018). Eutrophication is associated with an excessive amount of nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus) discharged in a water body. Thus, the slightly higher impact of HRAPs scenario (scenario UASB+HRAP) was due to the higher concentration of nutrients in the effluent (Tables 1 and 2), in accordance with previous studies (Arashiro et al., 2018; Garfí et al., 2017; Gutierrez, 2014). It may be associated with the presence of microalgae in the final effluent, which assimilate nitrogen and phosphorus during wastewater treatment. This may occur if microalgae are not completely separated in the settler, as indicated by the higher concentration of total suspended solids in the final effluent (Tables 1 and 2). The difficulty in sedimentation of microalgae in wastewater is reported in the literature and is associated with the size of the cells, which is very small and tends to remain in suspension (Gupta et al., 2017). To improve the separation of microalgae in the treated effluent, coagulants can be used. However, the use of chemical products in a natural system is of great concern due to the assimilation of these products by microalgae and the possibility of producing hazardous sludge (Gupta et al., 2017). This can be avoided by the use of natural coagulants, which increase the recovery of microalgal biomass by up to 90 % and do not restrict the valorization and reuse of microalgal biomass (Gutiérrez et al., 2015). Nevertheless, the effluent of all the scenarios considered meets the quality requirements for discharge or reuse of treated water (i.e. Brazilian standards: BOD<120 mg L^−1; Total Ammonia Nitrogen <20 mg L^−1; state standards for Minas Gerais: COD <180 mg L^−1) (CONAMA, 2005; Von Sperling, 2016).

Regarding the Mineral resource scarcity impact category, the most environmentally friendly solution was the polishing ponds scenario (scenario UASB+PP). This was mainly due to the lower amount of construction materials needed for the implementation of this technology (Table 2). Indeed, the higher impact of HRAPs scenario (scenario UASB+HRAP) was due to a larger amount of construction materials used (98 % of the overall impact), such as concrete and steel, as also shown in previous studies (Arashiro et al., 2018; Garfí et al., 2017). Indeed, the HRAPs scenario (scenario UASB+HRAP) had a higher surface area requirement (3 m^2 p.e.^−1) compared to the other alternatives (0.05–2.6 m^2 p.e.^−1) (Table 1). It has to be noted that an increase of organic load in the influent would increase the surface area needed for all the technologies and, consequently, the results of this impact category would increase in all scenarios. On the other hand, the construction technique for the implementation of polishing ponds (scenario UASB+PP) mainly consists of excavation and waterproofing. Thus, the requirement for construction materials was way lower for the polishing ponds (scenario UASB+PP) compared to the other scenarios (Table 2). To improve the environmental footprint of the HRAPs scenario (scenario UASB+HRAP), its design should be optimized by reducing the amount of construction materials used (e.g. excavation instead of concrete structure) (Arashiro et al., 2018).

Regarding the Fossil resource scarcity impact category, in all scenarios, the potential environmental impacts caused by construction materials production and electricity consumption were completely offset by the avoided energy generated from biogas cogeneration. In this impact category, the most environmentally friendly solution was the HRAPs (scenario UASB+HRAP). As for Global warming, Stratospheric Ozone Depletion and Terrestrial Ecotoxicity impact categories, it was mainly due to the higher amount of biogas produced from the co-digestion of microalgae and raw wastewater. This was in accordance with previous studies that demonstrated the environmental and economic benefits of biogas recovery from wastewater (Amaral et al., 2019, 2018).

In conclusion, the UASB reactor coupled with HRAPs showed to be a feasible solution for wastewater treatment in small communities in Brazil, since microalgae biomass can be valorised to increase biogas productivity. Further studies should be carried out in order to explore other ways to valorise the microalgae biomass (e.g. producing biofertilizer) and to evaluate the social benefits associated with this technology.


3.2 Economic analysis

The results of the economic assessment are shown in Table 3 . Regarding capital costs, the trickling filter scenario (scenario UASB+TKF) was the least expensive, followed by the constructed wetlands (scenario UASB+CW), the polishing ponds (scenario UASB+PP) and the HRAPs (scenario UASB+HRAP) scenarios. The capital cost is mainly associated with the surface area required for the implementation of each alternative, the amount and type of construction materials (e.g. concrete, steel) and the construction technique (e.g. concrete vs. excavation). As already mentioned, the HRAPs scenario (scenario UASB+HRAP) had a higher surface area requirement (3 m^2 p.e.^−1) compared to the other alternatives (0.05–2.6 m^2 p.e.^−1) (Table 1). Also, it required a higher amount of expensive construction materials (e.g. concrete and steel) (Table 2). Improving the design of HRAPs by reducing materials (e.g. concrete) consumption can not only reduce their environmental impact but also their capital costs.

Regarding the direct operation and maintenance costs, all the scenarios showed similar costs ranging from 0.06 to 0.10 € m^−3 _water, as suggested previously (Garfí et al., 2017). The slightly lower operation and maintenance costs associated with the constructed wetlands and trickling filter scenarios (scenarios UASB+CW and UASB+TKF, respectively) were mainly due to the lower energy consumption (Table 2) and the simplicity of system operation, which implies easier maintenance. On the other hand, the net operation and maintenance cost was calculated considering the price of electricity sold to the grid, which was withdrawn from the overall operational and maintenance cost of the system. The results showed that the net operation and maintenance cost was way lower for the HRAPs scenario (scenario UASB+HRAP). In fact, due to the higher biogas production obtained from the co-digestion of microalgae and raw wastewater in the UASB reactor, the direct operation and maintenance cost was completely offset by the sale of electricity obtained from biogas cogeneration in this scenario. This fact makes HRAPs (scenario UASB+HRAP) an attractive nature-based solution from an economic point of view.


3.3 Limitations

LCA is a modelling tool to assess environmental impacts related to a product or process from raw material extraction through processing, manufacturing, distribution, use, and disposal or recycling. LCA allows decision-makers to compare different products or processes and to select the one that has the lowest impact on the environment.

The main limitation of this study consisted of the principal constraint reported in several LCA studies: the lack of access to specific data for certain upstream or downstream activities (e.g. specific data on concrete production or sludge landfilling in Brazil). This limitation is primarily addressed with the use of the comprehensive LCA database Ecoinvent (Moreno Ruiz et al., 2020; Weidema et al., 2013). Moreover, since the same Ecoinvent processes are used in all the scenarios, the error that may exist in the assessment could affect the value of the overall impact but not the scenarios comparison.


4 Conclusion

This study compared 4 alternatives for wastewater treatment and bioenergy recovery using the Life Cycle Assessment methodology. From an environmental point of view, the results showed that the HRAPs scenario was the most environmentally friendly alternative in 4 out of 8 impact categories (i.e. Global warming, Stratospheric Ozone Depletion, Terrestrial Ecotoxicity and Fossil resource scarcity). This was mainly due to the higher biogas production obtained from the co-digestion of microalgae and raw wastewater in the UASB reactor, which can be converted into electricity and heat. Indeed, in the HRAPs scenario, the avoided energy was between 4 and 6 times higher compared to the other scenarios. The environmental performance of the HRAPs may be improved by: i) reducing NH_4 ^+ volatilization by controlling the pH using CO_2 injection; ii) improving microalgae separation in the treated effluent using natural coagulants (e.g. starch); iii) improving HRAPs design in order to decrease the amount of construction materials used (e.g. excavation instead of concrete structure).

From an economic point of view, despite the HRAPs showed a higher capital cost, the operation and maintenance cost was completely offset by the sale of electricity obtained from biogas cogeneration. Improving the design of HRAPs can not only reduce their environmental impact but also their capital costs.

Finally, the UASB reactor coupled with HRAPs showed to be a feasible nature-based solution for wastewater treatment in small communities in Brazil since microalgae biomass can be valorised to increase biogas productivity. Further studies should be carried out in order to explore other ways to valorise the microalgae biomass (e.g. producing biofertilizer) and to evaluate the social benefits associated with this technology.


 CRediT authorship contribution statement

Lucas Vassalle: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Investigation, Writing – original draft. Ivet Ferrer: Conceptualization, Resources, Data curation, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition. Fabiana Passos: Conceptualization, Resources, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition. Cesar Rossas Mota Filho: Resources, Supervision. Marianna Garfí: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Investigation, Resources, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition.


Appendix A Supplementary data

The following is the supplementary data related to this article.


Appendix A Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.163291.