TITLE: Anaerobic treatment of spoiled milk from milk processing industry for energy recovery – A laboratory to pilot scale study


1 Introduction

Dairy industries release large quantities of wastewater, often in the order of thousands of cubic meters per day [1]. The dairy wastewater is similar to most other agro-industries wastewater characterized by higher biological oxygen demand and COD [2]. High concentrations of organic matter in dairy wastewater cause pollution problems to the surroundings [3]. Aerobic treatment (activated sludge process) is traditionally used for treatment of wastewater [4]. Aerobic methods for treatment and disposal of dairy wastewater [5,6] have been less efficient, mainly due to bulking and excessive growth of biomass [7]. Anaerobic methods for the treatment of dairy wastewater are attracting the attention of researchers because of the presence of high organic content in the waste, low energy requirement of the process, lesser sludge production, and generation of fuel in the form of methane [8].

In India, milk is collected in villages through a first-tier collection system called society. From the society, milk is transferred to nearby chilling centers for the immediate chilling to prevent microbial activity. From the chilling centers this milk is transported to the processing dairies in metro cities through insulated road vehicles. In the processing dairies, this milk is subjected to pasteurization. In metro dairies, milk waste water is treated normally by the aerobic method, which is a cost-intensified process.

In developed countries, there has been an increased interest in the development of technologies for harnessing renewable energy sources such as biomass either directly or through conversion routes. The anaerobic digestion process has been applied for the treatment of wastes and bio solids for decades [9]. Recently, anaerobic digestion has received added attention since it produces biogas and releases nutrients that can be recycled to be used in agriculture as bio fertilizer [10,11]. The nutrients in the raw material remain in the mineralized digested sludge as accessible compounds. Various reactor configurations like anaerobic contact reactor [12–14], upflow anaerobic sludge blanket reactor [15–19], fluidized bed reactor, and anaerobic fixed film reactor [20,21] have been developed to treat wastewaters from different industries.

The main objectives of the study are to segregate spoiled milk at source and prevent them from mixing up with the effluent, generate energy, produce clean effluent for recycle and irrigation, reduce the odors associated with the waste products, concentrate the nutrients in a solid sludge as biofertilizer, and reduce pathogens associated with the waste. Keeping the above mentioned points, the treatment of spoiled milk using a lab scale batch reactor followed by a pilot plant ASBR were investigated. The results obtained are presented and discussed.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Materials

The spoiled waste milk for the present investigation was collected from the milk processing industry near Chennai, India. All the chemicals used during the experiments were of analytical grade purchased from Merk (Mumbai, India). Double distilled water from an all-glass apparatus was used whenever necessary.


2.2 Characteristics of the spoiled milk

The characteristics of the spoiled milk were determined as per APHA standard methods [22]. The inlet and outlet COD were determined by ISO 6060 method [23]. The biogas collected was measured volumetrically in a scaled wet gas meter and its composition was analyzed using a Varian Analytical Instruments CP-3800 series gas chromatograph. The types of detectors employed were the flame ionization detector and thermal conductivity detector. Calcium, magnesium, sodium, copper, manganese, nickel, and iron contents were analyzed by using inductively coupled plasma–optical emission spectroscopy (PerkinElmer Optima 7000 DV, USA).


2.3 Inoculum

The inoculum consists of an undefined mixed culture from an equivalent system that is actively digesting a similar feedstock [24]. Digested cow dung was used as an inoculum for seeding the reactor. The cow dung was diluted with water (1:10) and filtered through a 40 mesh screen to remove larger particles. The filtered sludge was used as a seed culture for preparing inoculum for the studies. The sludge was acclimatized with the spoiled milk for 3 months under anaerobic condition to make sure that there is no undigested matter present in the digester. This acclimatized inoculum will help in the quick start up of the biogas digester.


2.4 Batch reactor

The anaerobic digestion of spoiled milk was performed in a laboratory scale batch (Figs. 1a and 1b ). The total designed volume of the reactor was 1.75 L with a working volume of 1.25 L. The reactor was made of glass having a provision for inlet and outlet. The reactor was kept at room temperature at 32 ± 3 °C. The spoiled milk (if it is in curdling form) is completely homogenized using a blender before it is fed into the reactor so that there are no settleable solids during the feeding. The feed was introduced into the reactor via an inlet feeding port and the same quantity of outlet was collected from the bottom of the reactor by means of gravity. In order to resuspend the sediments and avoid scum layers, the reactor was shaken once a day. The biogas produced was collected in a scaled wet gas meter at room temperature. In addition, biogas production by the inoculum without the feed was also recorded as control. The pH was adjusted to the required level using 5% aqueous lactic acid and sodium bicarbonate solutions.


2.5 The pilot plant

The pilot plant facility (Figs. 2a and 2b ) comprised of a floating drum ASBR having an operational volume equal to 100 L. The material used for construction was fiber glass reinforced plastic. The influent with a required pH was introduced continuously into the reactor. The influent pH was regulated by aqueous solutions of sodium bicarbonate, which were dosed through a 5 L conditioning tank. The study was conducted at room temperature at 32 ± 3 °C. The daily biogas production was measured. Excess effluent was removed regularly to maintain a constant reactor volume. The biogas was vented out after sampling and measuring the volume at room temperature whenever required.


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Characteristics of the spoiled milk

The physicochemical characteristics of the spoiled milk were given in Table 1 . A random analysis of the sample was done for a period of 3 months with a regular interval. The values were documented to evaluate standard deviation. It was observed that COD and the nutrient level of the spoiled milk were very high, indicating the complexity in treating the milk waste.


3.2 Batch test


3.2.1 Effect of pH on cumulative biogas production

The effect of pH was monitored to obtain maximum biogas production in a batch reactor. The initial COD loading was 150,000 ± 100 mg L^−1 with 10% inoculums, and a Hydraulic Retention Time (HRT) of 48 h was maintained for all pH studies. The pH was varied from 5 to 8. Lactic acid and sodium bicarbonate solutions were used to adjust the pH to a required level. As shown in Fig. 3 , a lower volume of biogas production was observed at lower pH. It is expected that the drop in pH inhibits the growth of hydrogen-utilizing methanogenic bacteria, causing a rise in the hydrogen partial pressure, which causes further accumulation of volatile fatty acids. Therefore, methane generation is reduced considerably when pH drops [25,26]. Maximum bio gas production was recorded when the pH ranged between 6.5 and 7.5, with an optimum at 7 pH. It was also observed that there was a decrease in biogas volume with increase in pH after 7.5 pH. This can be attributed to the sensitivity of methanogens to high pH [26].


3.2.2 Effect of inoculum potential on cumulative biogas production

Instability during both the start up and operation of the anaerobic degradation process can be problematic due to the low specific growth rate of the methanogenic microorganism involved. [27]. Anaerobic microorganisms acclimatized to spoiled milk can be good inoculum for a fast start up of the operation of the reactor. The inoculum dosage was varied from 5% to 25% in volume, as shown in Fig. 4 . A little difference in the optimum inoculum percentage was observed for cumulative biogas production. A 10% concentration of inoculum was relatively more efficient at a given concentration treatment, yielding a larger volume of biogas, than that of a 5% concentration. There was relatively no change in biogas volume noticed at other higher inoculum concentrations of 15% and 20%, but a higher rate of biogas production was observed. Therefore, 10% of inoculum concentration was taken as optimum value for corresponding experiments.


3.2.3 Effect of COD loading on cumulative biogas production

The effects of initial COD concentration and digestion time on cumulative biogas production are shown in Fig. 5 . It was observed that the volume of biogas produced was found to increase linearly in the beginning, then nonlinearly at a slower rate, and finally attained saturation, called complete digestion. The digestion time was influenced remarkably by the variation in the initial COD concentration. This is because of the food to microorganism ratio. The initial microorganism population can only consume a certain amount of food in the form of COD. Therefore, the more the COD, the longer it takes to enhance the food to microorganism ratio. It was observed that the biogas produced per gram of COD destruction varied with varying the COD concentration and it decreased with an increase in COD concentration mass. The amount of biogas produced decreases from 0.344 to 0.315 L of biogas per gram of COD destruction for an increase in COD from 50,000 to 250,000 mg L^−1 as shown in Table 2 . This instability is usually witnessed by feed overload [28,29]. Whereas the cumulative biogas volume increases from 17.2 to 78.75 L with an increase in initial COD.

Biogas production rates are given in Fig. 6 . The maximum rates occurred at different reaction times that ranged from 18 to 24 h for 50,000–250,000 ± 100 mg L^−1 COD, respectively. It was observed that lower COD concentrations exhibit maximum biogas production rates at less time than higher concentrations. But a higher COD concentration resulted in a higher peak rate.


3.3 Pilot plant studies

In pilot scale, anaerobic digestion of spoiled milk substrate was carried out in an ASBR reactor. After determining the kinetic parameters, using experimental data at different optimized operational conditions in batch system (e.g., inoculum concentration, influent pH, HRT), the reactor was fed according to the optimum results. But a COD of 200,000 ± 100 mg L^−1 was selected based on the real time average COD of spoiled milk. A constant volumetric loading of 5 L day^−1 spoiled milk was maintained. The reactor was fed daily for 30 days.

Fig. 7 shows the relationship between the daily biogas production and the retention time, at a feeding rate of 1 kg COD day^−1. The average daily biogas production during 30 days of retention time period was observed to be 0.3117 m^3 of biogas per day. It was observed that biogas production rate became stable immediately after the second day of the digestion process. This period is very short because milk is easily biodegradable when compared to other substrates like municipal garbage [30], oil seed cake [31], poultry manure [32], kitchen waste, and night soil [33].

Anaerobic digestion is a complex process of degrading organic compounds through a variety of intermediates into methane and carbon dioxide by the action of a consortium of microorganisms [34,35]. The maximum and minimum values of methane and carbon dioxide were found to vary from 69.18% to 60.61% and 27.18% to 26.0%, respectively, starting from first day to 30th day of retention time. The average methane and carbon dioxide content over 30 days were found as 64.88% and 26.01%, respectively.

Cumulative biogas, methane, and carbon dioxide production over a 30-day retention period were 9.664, 6.27, and 2.514 m^3 respectively, from a total of 150 L of spoiled milk, therefore 1 L milk can produce an average of 64.42 L biogas. The average outlet COD of the stabilized plant was found to be 14,390 ± 60 mg L^−1. The COD removal efficiency of the pilot plant was 92.80%.


4 Conclusion

Spoiled milk was treated under anaerobic condition. Accordingly, an investigation was made on a laboratory scale to assess the feasibility and was then scaled up to a pilot plant. The batch study suggested an optimum 7 pH with low COD concentration and 10% inoculum. The rate of production of biogas was high during 18–24 h. Results showed that spoiled milk was easily degradable in comparison to that of other agro-based raw materials. The scaled-up pilot plant shows an average COD removal efficiency of 92.8% with 0.3117 m^3 of biogas per kg of COD destruction. It was found that treatment of spoiled milk by ASBR was a most cost-effective approach with profitable biogas recovery.