TITLE: Effect of pre-treatment on sequential anaerobic co-digestion of chicken litter with agricultural and food wastes under semi-solid conditions and comparison with wet anaerobic digestion


1 Introduction

There has been a growing attention on the use of livestock manure especially chicken litter as an alternative source for bioenergy production (Abouelenien et al., 2016; Zahan et al., 2018b). This is mainly due to the continuous land, environmental and economic concerns and obligations facing by the farmers and governments (Ragauskas et al., 2006). In Victoria, Australia, the agro-industries, such as the poultry industry produces around 0.45 million tonnes per year of chicken litter (CL) (Scott et al., 2009; Zahan et al., 2018a). This study focuses on chicken farms and aims to investigate the potential of CL and other agro-industrial wastes, from the neighbouring area available for a semi-solid anaerobic digestion (AD), using a designated area in Victoria, Australia as a case study. To complete the investigation the organic fraction of municipal solid wastes (FW) and agricultural residue such as wheat straw (WS) were also included; being abundant and available for a potential AD facility. This will reduce the huge cost for managing the wastes as well as can become energy source for those farms and broilers. In a broader context, advance resource recovery technologies will be researched which will be directly applicable to Australian agro-industrial wastes management and resource recovery.

AD is considered to be one of the advantageous processes for organic waste management, which produces biogas of high calorific value and soil conditioner while reducing the environmental hazard of these wastes (Bong et al., 2018; Poulsen and Adelard, 2016). AD is usually classified, based on the anaerobic digester’s total solids (TS) content, as wet, semi-solid and solid state (dry), referring to TS percentages of <10%, 10–15% and >15%, respectively (Abouelenien et al., 2016; Karthikeyan and Visvanathan, 2013; Kothari et al., 2014). Some literature also classified semi solid as 10–20% and solid AD at >20% TS (Karthikeyan and Visvanathan, 2013). Solid state AD has several benefits over conventional wet AD, including smaller reactor volume, less heating and energy requirement, less wastewater and digestate (Huang et al., 2018; Rodriguez-Verde et al., 2018). However, while wet AD of manure has been widely established and studied, very few studies have been conducted on the semi-solid and solid state AD, especially of poultry or chicken litter (Abouelenien et al., 2016; Rodriguez-Verde et al., 2018; Zahan and Othman, 2018).

CL, that is generated from broiler farms, is a mixture of manure and bedding materials (wood shaving, rice hull and straw) and has high biochemical methane potential (BMP) which is comparable to sludge BMP potentials (Zahan et al., 2016). However, AD of CL is prone to inhibition due to the high level of protein and amino acid. This proteins and urea, during AD, degrade to ammonia (Niu et al., 2013), where unionised or free ammonia (NH3) generally accumulates and reaches threshold concentration that is toxic to the anaerobic microorganisms, particularly methanogens (Borja et al., 1996; Liu et al., 2012), which are associated with (Liu et al., 2012) an increase in pH (Liu et al., 2012). Although many published papers focused on inhibition by ammonia and also volatile acids (Abendroth et al., 2015; Akindele and Sartaj, 2018; Nie et al., 2015), successful AD of CL as a single substrate has not been reported nor there are large scale dry AD plants. The most effective mechanism to overcome ammonia inhibition is to reduce the precursors for ammonia formation in the AD process (Karthikeyan and Visvanathan, 2012). The organic substrates of high C-content, i.e. high C/N ratio can mix with high N-content substrate (CL) with the aim to dilute the N-content. Wheat straw and FW both has comparatively high C/N ratio than CL. Therefore, the anaerobic co-digestion (ACoD) of CL with other agro-industrial wastes with an aim for balancing the influent C/N ratio could be utilised to control inhibition (Nie et al., 2015).

Both CL and wheat straw is lignocellulosic in nature and has a recalcitrant and crystalline structure which resists bacterial attack and biodegradability (Mohsenzadeh et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2014). Therefore, pre-treatment prior to AD is required to increase the biodegradability of lignocellulose by decreasing its crystallinity and eliminating its network structure with amorphous components (Salehian et al., 2013). Among different pre-treatment method, the chemical methods of pre-treating lignocellulosic materials are widely employed in many pilot and demonstration plants since they maximise lignin removal with minimum sugar loss i.e. not more than 5% (Taherzadeh and Karimi, 2007). Some of the chemical pre-treatment are even cost effective at low concentrations with minimum heat and power requirements (Nitsos et al., 2017). The alkaline pre-treatment is widely used to break down ester bonds between amorphous and cellulose contents by saponification and cleavage of lignin-carbohydrate linkages, and by the reduction in polymerization, cross links and crystallinity, which increases the porosity, internal surface area, and structural swelling (Zheng et al., 2014). Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) pre-treatment was investigated with an aim to improve biogas from lignocellulosic wheat straw (Chandra et al., 2012), rice straw (He et al., 2009, 2008), corn stover (Wang et al., 2013; Zhu et al., 2010), hardwoods and softwoods (Chen et al., 2014; Mirahmadi et al., 2010; Mohsenzadeh et al., 2012; Salehian and Karimi, 2013), paper and pulp sludge (Lin et al., 2009), and oil palm empty fruit branches (Nieves et al., 2011). However, various treatment conditions, such as NaOH concentration, time, and temperature can show variations in results along with lignocellulosic material types (Mohseni Kabir et al., 2014).

Removing selectively hemicellulose and lignin from biomass with dilute acid and alkali pre-treatments eliminates the undesirable interaction between lignin and cellulose, as well as the physical barrier of hemicellulose leaving cellulose more accessible for enzymes (Alvira et al., 2010). Dilute sodium hydroxide (i.e., alkaline) pretreatments (AKP) are generally effective for lignin removal (Carrillo et al., 2005) and dilute sulfuric acid pretreatments (DAP) efficiently hydrolyze hemicellulose without an excessive formation of inhibitory degradation by-products (Saha et al., 2005). Both alkaline and acid pre-treatment, do not cause excessive sugar degradation and require much lower pressure and temperature compared to other thermochemical pretreatment methods (Mosier et al., 2005). Therefore, sequential pretreatments may be a promising strategy to establish suitable industrial-scale processes with high rates of sugar recovery (Mussatto et al., 2010; Sanchez et al., 2015).

There is limited information in the effect of chemical pretreatment on CL during the ACoD with agricultural wastes and food wastes for enhancing biogas yield, VS reduction and digestate quality. The authors of this paper in their recent publication reported the BMP for the co-digestion of these substrates under wet AD of 2–4% TS (Zahan et al., 2018c) and their semi-continuous assays at 4–6% TS (Zahan et al., 2018b) and the co-substrates mixture that produced the highest yield and showed process stability were used to inform the experiment design in this study. The main goal of this study were (i) to investigate the potential of semi-solid ACoD of CL at optimum C/N ratios and (ii) to assess the effect of pre-treatment of lignocellulosic based substrates on enhancing biogas yield from the substrates. Methane production, ammonia accumulation, volatile acid production, pH as well as fractional analysis and degradation of cellulose were used as evaluation parameters.


2 Materials and methodology


2.1 Characteristics of substrates and inoculum

In this study, three different agro-industrial wastes: CL, FW and WS were chosen as potential substrates for AD. The substrates (CL and WS) were collected from regional Victoria, Australia (Zahan et al., 2017). The CL was stored in plastic airtight buckets. WS samples were ground, sieved to below 5 mm and stored in plastic airtight containers (Zahan et al., 2018c).

The FW substrate was prepared to simulate the organic fraction of municipal solid waste (OFMSW). A batch of synthetic OFMSW referred to here as food waste (FW) was prepared using compositional data collected by Sustainability Victoria, Australia (IWM020, 2014). The FW was then stored in small containers at −20 °C (Zahan et al., 2018b). The characteristics of the samples were measured at regular intervals to determine the variation in compositions and the shelf life of the FW samples (Table 1 ).

The inoculum used in this experiment was collected from the mesophilic anaerobic digester at Melton wastewater treatment plant, Melbourne and was kept at 37 °C under anaerobic conditions for several days to minimise its background biogas production (Zahan et al., 2018b). The inoculum was then acclimatised with the feedstock’s (a mix of different combinations of substrates) over a long period of time to get high solid inoculum before use in the reactors (Zahan and Othman, 2018). The characteristics of the substrates and the inoculum are shown in Table 1. The lignocellulosic substrates were also characterised for structural carbohydrates and lignin (Zahan and Othman, 2018).


2.2 Pre-treatment


2.2.1 Alkaline pretreatment

Alkaline pretreatment (AKP) has shown to be very effective in reducing the lignin content of lignocellulosic biomass without significant loss in carbohydrates, thus increases the bio-digestibility. NaOH pre-treatment was applied for both CL and WS substrates. Every 1 g substrate was immersed in 10 mL alkaline solution for different periods of time under different operational conditions. Independent factors including NaOH concentration (1–5% w/v), reaction time (30–90 min), and temperature (60–120 °C) were explored according to experimental design developed using response surface methodology (RSM) with a three-level factorial experimental design, design 1 (Table 2 ). This pre-treatment design was used for both CL and WS.


2.2.2 Sequential alkaline-acid pre-treatment

Sequential pre-treatment was carried out according to the methods proposed by Sanchez et al. (2015) and at the best conditions determined for the alkali pre-treatment (as described in Section 2.2.1). WS and CL were immersed in 1%, 2%, and 3% (w/v) H_2SO_4 solutions as per the RSM design 2 (Table 2). The substrates were treated under three different temperature, 60 °C, 90 °C and 120 °C for 30, 60 and 90 mins. After pre-treatment, the samples were washed with de-ionized water to achieve a pH of around 7 and stored at 4 °C for further use.


2.2.3 Optimum pre-treatment condition

The optimum pre-treatment conditions determined by analysing were-1. Alkaline pre-treatmenta. CL − 5% NaOH 90 min 120 °C b. WS − 1% NaOH 30 min 120 °C 2. Sequential alkaline and acid pre-treatmenta. CL − 5% NaOH 90 min 120 °C + 3%H_2SO_4 90 min 120 °C b. WS – 1% NaOH 30 min 120 °C + 3% H_2SO_4 30 min 120 °C


2.3 Experimental methodology

A sequential batch assay was conducted to determine biogas production under same AD conditions (inoculum, mesophilic temperature and time) applied for the biochemical methane potential (BMP) assays. The sequential tests were carried out at 15% TS over 215 days in six cycles, where the substrates were mixed such that CL:FW:WS is 35:32.5:32.5 (g/g VS) to achieve a C/N ratio of 26.5 which was the optimum C/N ratio obtained through BMP assays under wet AD conditions (Zahan et al., 2018c).

All the sequential tests were performed in 1 L reactors at 37 ± 1 °C. Inoculum to substrates (S:I ratio) of 2:1 were applied and a total of 12 reactors in triplicates were used to assess performance at four different conditions. The headspace in the bottles was flushed with nitrogen gas for 2 min and the bottles were closed with a rubber suba seal (Zahan et al., 2018c). The bottles were kept in an incubator shaker at a constant rotational speed of 100 rpm. The volume of biogas produced was measured using a water displacement unit and the gas composition was determined using gas chromatography.

For the first 2 cycles, all the reactors received untreated samples, and then pre-treated samples were fed, i.e during cycles, 3–6 cycles (Table 3 ). Reactor R_1 always received untreated substrate as a control and also served as an indicator of reproducibility. Reactors R_2, R_3, and R_4 received pre-treated WS, pre-treated CL and both pre-treated CL and WS, respectively. The reactors during cycle 3 and 4 were operated at the same conditions, where the lignocellulosic CL and WS were pre-treated using NaOH at the optimum condition described in Table 3. During cycle 5 and 6 the reactors received sequential alkaline and acid pre-treated CL and WS.

Biogas and methane composition were analysed regularly, whereas digestate characterisation was carried out at the end of experiments. The digestates were characterised for pH, NH_4, FOS/TAC, VA and fractional analysis for cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin. The results obtained were also compared with the performances under wet AD conditions.


2.4 Analytical methods

TS, volatile solids (VS) and alkalinity were measured according to APHA Methods 2540B, 2540E and 2320B, respectively (Bridgewater et al., 2012). The COD (total and soluble), total phosphorus (TP), total nitrogen (TN), ammonium and volatile acids (VA) were determined by colorimetric techniques using a HACH (Model: DR/5000 U) spectrophotometer according to the methods 8000, 10127, 10072, 10031 and 8196, respectively (Zahan et al., 2018c). The samples were centrifuged (Eppendorf 5702, Germany) at 4.4 rpm for 15 min and then filtered through 0.45 μm filter paper (mixed cellulose-ester membrane filter, Advantec, Japan), to measure the soluble constituents. The pH was measured using a calibrated pH meter (ThermoOrion, Model 550A). The C/N ratio was determined using LECO (TruMac) analyser.

The composition of the biogas was analysed according to the APHA method 2720C using gas chromatography (Varian 450-GC, Varian Australia Pty Ltd., Netherlands) equipped with a packed column (GS Carbonplot 113–3132, 1.5 μm, 30 m^* 0.320 mm, stainless steel, Agilent Technologies Inc., Australia). The carrier gas used was helium at a flow rate of 28 mL/min. The temperature settings for the column, detector and injector were 70 °C, 200 °C and 100 °C, respectively. The biogas was collected and manually injected using a 50 mL FORTUNA^® Optima glass syringe (Poulten and Graf, Germany). The volume of biogas was normalised to standard conditions i.e. standard temperature and pressure (0 °C and 1 bar) according to method described by (Strömberg et al., 2014) and results are expressed as norm-litre (L_N). The headspace was also corrected for methane (CH_4) and carbon dioxide (CO_2) to 100% according to VDI 4630 (2006) (VDI, 2006).

The sequential fractionation of untreated and pre-treated substrates as well as the digestate were done according to the method reported by Opatokun et al. (2015) and Zahan et al. (2018b).

Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy (Spectrum 100, PerkinElmer, USA) equipped with a universal ATR (attenuated total reflection) accessory was used for structural analysis and crystallinity of the treated and untreated samples. The samples were dried in oven at low temperature of 40 °C before doing the experiments to ensure no structural damage. The spectra were obtained with an average of 64 scans from 4000 to 600 cm^−1 with 4 cm^−1 resolution monitored by Spectrum software. Crystallinity index (CI) and total crystallinity index, which are the absorbance ratio of A1430/A896 and A1375/A2900, respectively, were calculated from the spectra.


2.5 Statistical analysis

The RSM design for each pre-treatment comprised fifteen experiments which were carried out in duplicate according to the scheme mentioned in Table 2 and then the results were analysed using the statistical software MINITAB Version 17.1.0. Optimum values of the selected variables were obtained by solving the regression equation and by analyzing the response surface contour plots.


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Characterisation and pre-treatment of the lignocellulosic CL and WS

The details of basic physical properties and chemical compositions of the substrates i.e. CL and WS are shown in Table 1. The weight percentage of ash and moisture content of the substrates varied and lied in the ranges of 40.75%–4.85% and 22.8%–17.1% for CL and WS, respectively. The C/N ratio of the WS was 6.27 times higher than of the CL. Among the studied biomass, CL showed the lowest C/N ratio, whereas, for FW it was slightly higher with a value of 18.1. The lower C/N ratio in the biomass implies less C-content during the digestion which paves the accumulation of ammonia during AD. It was also reported that, C/N ratio between 20 and 30 is considered optimal but some studies reported stabilised biogas production within a wider ranges of C/N ratios, e.g. 9–30, depending on the substrates (Zahan et al., 2016).

The composition of the lignocellulosic substrates used, CL and WS, i.e. cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin and water soluble content (untreated and pre-treated) were determined by fractional analysis (Fig. 1 ). Significant difference was observed for CL and WS in terms of structural carbohydrates. Hot water extraction process was performed to remove the water solubles compounds. It was observed that CL and WS contained similar amounts of water soluble contents (21–23%) and hemicelluloses (17.3–18.5%), respectively.

The substrate cellulose compound in WS (34.8%) was almost 2.7 times higher compared to CL (12.97%). The total crystallinity index for WS and CL were found to be 1.572 and 1.898 respectively. This is due to the presence of more crystalline hardwood i.e. wood shavings in CL compared to WS (Salehian et al., 2013; Zheng et al., 2014). The lignin content in CL (46.8%) was very high. The fractionation analysis is a gravitational analysis method of total fractions; therefore, the lignin content presented here also included a high fraction of ash content in it.

After NaOH pre-treatment, the degradation of lignin was found to be 2–40% and 30–70% removal for CL and WS, respectively for the different conditions tested. The amount of cellulose and water soluble content increased drastically (1.6–2 times higher), however the degradation of hemicellulose was much lower. Therefore, the alkali pre-treated CL and WS at the optimum condition, were further sequentially acid pre-treated. After the sequential pre-treatment, though the lignin content was not degraded much, a huge degradation of hemicellulose content was observed i.e. almost 50% of the hemicellulose content degraded. The cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin and water soluble content of the untreated and for alkali and sequential alkali-acid pretreatment were shown in Fig. 1.


3.2 Sequential anaerobic digestion

The average daily biogas productions (reported as mL_N/gVS_added fed to the reactor) were measured at 15% TS feedstock for 215 days, for the substrates CL:FW:WS at a ratio of 35:32.5:32.5 to obtain C/N ratio of 26.5, the optimum substrate mix ratio found using batch ACoD assays (Zahan et al., 2018c). From Fig. 2 , consistent biogas production of 321.8 ± 13.4 mL_N biogas/g VS_added was observed over the first 2 cycles, for all the four reactors, where untreated substrates were fed. The results presented here are the average of triplicate values for each reactor. After the 1st and 2nd cycle, pre-treatments were applied to CL and WS fed into reactors R_2, R_3 and R_4. It can be observed from Fig. 2, that ACoD of the pre-treated substrates showed improved biogas production compared to the untreated substrates, at the same conditions.

During cycle 3 and 4, alkali pre-treatments were applied to CL and WS. From Fig. 2, an improvement of around 42% and 45% in total biogas was observed compared to untreated substrates for reactors R_2 (receiving alkali treated WS) and R_3 (Receiving alkali treated CL) respectively. However, when both CL and WS were alkali pre-treated and fed into reactor R_4, up to 80% increase in total biogas was observed compared to untreated substrates (reactor R_1) and almost 25% increase compared to the single pre-treated WS (R_2) or CL (R_3).

During cycles 5 and 6, sequential alkali and acid pre-treatment were applied to CL and WS. R_2 received sequential alkali-acid pre-treated WS feedstock, R_3 received sequential alkali-acid pre-treated CL mixture and R_4 received both pre-treated substrates (CL and WS). Biogas production improved by 44% and 51% compared to untreated substrates for reactors R_2 and R_3 respectively, when either of WS or CL was pre-treated. However, when both CL and WS were sequentially alkali-acid pre-treated and fed into the AD reactor (i.e. Reactor R_4), up to 88% increase in total biogas was observed compared to untreated substrates (reactor R_1). With an extra pre-treatment added (acid pre-treatment), the improvement in total biogas was only around 5% compared to single alkali pre-treatment, as seen during cycles 3 and 4.

From Fig. 3 , during 1st and 2nd cycles, all the reactors showed a high initial peak between 51 and 60 mL_N biogas/g VS_added.d at day 1 and at day 3 a lag phase is observed. The high amount of biogas produced on date 1 are most likely because the reactors received acclimatised inoculum to the feedstock hence the anaerobic microorganisms were available and active to degrade the readily available soluble substrates. During 3rd and 4th cycle, an initial peak of 66, 68 and 75 mL_N biogas/g VS_added.d at day 1 was observed for reactors R_2, R_3 and R_4, respectively. During the 5th and 6th cycle, the biogas production in day 1 was the highest, and it was almost 52%, 53.3% and 87% higher for reactors R_2, R_3 and R_4, respectively than the initial peak from the untreated substrate mixture (reactor R_1).

After the initial peak, a lag phase of 7 days starting from day 3 was observed. However, when pre-treated CL and WS were fed into reactors R_2, R_3 and R_4 for cycles 3 to 6, the amount of lag phase at day 3was improved by 5–12 mL_N biogas/g VS_added.d (Fig. 3) and the highest improvement was observed for reactor R_4 when both the pre-treated samples were used. A second peak was noticed on day 17–20 of 13–18 mL_N biogas/g VS_added.d during both the 1st and 2nd cycle. At 3rd and 4th cycle, the 2nd peak increased by 2–7 mL_N biogas/g VS_added.d for reactors R_2, R_3 and R_4 with alkali pre-treatment, however, it didn’t improve further when sequential acid pre-treatment were applied. Rather they had some scattered peaks after high initial 1st peak.

The biogas’ methane composition was between 60 and 67% for the untreated sample, (for cycle 1 and 2) and for the alkali pre-treated samples, the methane content was between 66 and 69% (cycle 3 and 4). When the AD reactors received sequential alkali-acid pre-treated substrates, the methane composition was found between 67 and 71%. Therefore, pre-treatment not only improved the total biogas production, it also improved the quality of the biogas, i.e. the percentage of methane.

For reactor R_1, which received untreated substrates for all six cycles, the biogas production slightly decreased i.e. around 10% compared to the initial cycle with the continual operation of the reactor. This indicates slight inhibition occurred in the sequential batch AD over the duration of the experiment (215 days) probably because of ammonia or lignocellulosic material accumulation. This phenomenon was explained in detail in Section 3.2.

Overall, it can therefore be stated that biogas quality improved with the pre-treatment of the lignocellulosic CL and WS. The daily biogas production was also improved by 50–80%. With alkali pre-treatment 40–80% improvement in biogas production was achievable when the AD reactor received feedstock where either of or both the CL and WS were pre-treated. However, sequential alkali/acid pretreatment only increased total biogas by 5% compared to alkali pre-treatment, though the initial daily biogas yields were higher.


3.3 Reactor performances

In addition to the biogas yield, different parameters were monitored at the end of each cycle to assess the quality of the digestate and supernatant. The process performance parameters measured are summarised in Table 4 and Fig. 4 .

The VS removal at the end of each cycle is shown in Table 4. In all the reactors, the VS removal for the first 2 cycles (untreated substrates) was around 36.7 ± 1.9%. It was observed that the VS removal under semi-continuous AD was 41.7% (Zahan et al., 2018b) and the VS removal of 42.8%, obtained using BMP assays at 4% TS feed (Zahan et al., 2018c) for CL ACoD with agricultural wastes and FW. As the reactors used acclimatised inoculum as anaerobic microbial source, therefore, the inoculum had already adapted to the different substrates-mix (feedstock), which could explain the TS and VS removal at these high TS of 15% being comparable to the AD at 4% TS, though slightly less.

For reactor R_1, the VS removal decreased to around 34.8%–30.65% with the continual operation of the reactors, which synchronised with the trend in biogas production. As shown in Fig. 4, the inhibitory parameters (NH_4 and VA) increased in the reactors with times, causing less activity of the methanogenic bacteria, which led to 15.4% decrease in VS removal.

When either CL or WS was alkali pre-treated, VS removal of around 42.6% and 39.5% respectively were observed for reactors R_2 and R_3. The VS removal from AD reactors that received pre-treated WS mixture was around 2% higher compared to the treated CL mixtures, as WS has more cellulose and less lignin content than CL. VS removal of around 50% was obtained when both the alkali pre-treated samples were fed into the reactor R_4 in cycle 3 and 4. During the 5th and 6th cycle, when sequential alkali and acid pre-treatment were applied, the VS removal ranged between 44% and 55%, for reactors R_2-R_4, which is almost 20–50% higher than the initial removal. From Fig. 4(a), the TS removal correlated with the biogas production trends. For reactor R_1, the TS removal efficiency also decreased with continual operation. The highest TS removal was around 47% for reactor R_4 when feedstock that contains sequential alkaline and acid pre-treated CL and WS mixture was applied.

Pre-treatment also improved the AD process performance. Characteristics at the end of each cycle are shown in Fig. 4. At the start, the pH was between 7.3 and 7.6 for cycle 1 and 2 (Fig. 4(b)), which increased to 7.7 with subsequent repeats of feeding for reactor R_1. With each repeat, the reactors were overloaded with CL as indicated by the increase in pH, associated with the accumulation of ammonia from the uric acid and proteins, and this subsequently increased the pH level (7.7) in the reactor. In this way, inhibition in the form of decreased TS, VS removal was evident for reactor R_1 (Table 4 and Fig. 4). The pH level decreased (7.4–7.45) with pre-treated feed which led to an improvement in biogas production and VS removal. With sequential pre-treatment, the pH level decreased further within the optimal range for the high performing reactors which are an ideal situation for stable methanogenesis (Zahan et al., 2018b).

No accumulation of VAs was evident and the highest VA observed with untreated feed (1.55 g/L) which is well below the inhibition threshold (4 g/L) (Siegert and Banks, 2005). The VA accumulation threshold can vary from substrate to substrate depending upon several factors and tolerances of microbial source.The accumulation of VA can cause instability of the process by inhibiting acetotrophic methanogenesis (Zahan et al., 2018b). From Fig. 4(c), the VAs in the reactors decreased further with pre-treated substrates, indicating no inhibitory effect for VA and was associated with increased biogas production.

From Fig. 4(d), for reactor R_1, the NH_4 increased with the continual repeats of feeding cycles. For wastewater, if the NH_4 level is between 1.5 and 2.0 g/L, inhibition occurs (Zahan et al., 2016). The ammonia level in reactor R_1 was in the inhibition range and with each repeat the ammonia level increased further. As acclimatised inoculum was used, it improved the tolerance for NH_4 level and the AD reactor was continued to produce biogas. Eventually, however, inhibition occured in the reactor, if no measure to stop the inhibition was taken. For reactor R_2, a decrease in NH_4 was observed for cycles 3 and 4. Similar trend was observed for R_3 which received feedstock including CL pre-treated samples. The pre-treatment improved the process performance, most likely through the increased water soluble organics as well as soluble organics which served to provide balance environment in terms of C/N and degradation products utilisation. From Fig. 4(d), the NH_4 level in reactor R_3 is slightly lower than reactor R_2. This is probably due to the pre-treatment of CL which removed some of the free ammonia in CL samples whereas in reactor R_2, untreated CL was used. For reactor R_4, where both CL and WS pre-treated samples were fed, best performance was observed and the ammonia was below 1500 mg/L.

From the results it can be summarised that with each sequential repeat untreated feed the removal of TS and VS decreased with increase in pH, and ammonia. This was very consistent with their biogas production trends. On the other hand, the pH, VA, ammonia level decreased with pre-treated feed with increased TS and VS removal. The inhibition in the reactors occurred more of an occurrence of ammonia inhibition rather than VA accumulation. The specific biogas production and CH_4 yield depended mostly on the origin of the substrates, composition, and operational conditions i.e. SRT, temperature for large reactors (Zahan et al., 2018b). Therefore, the results reported here should be applied to a continuous process and a small pilot scale continuously fed anaerobic digester before they are used in a large scale scenario.


3.4 Sequential fractionation

As the substrates (CL and WS) were lignocellulosic in nature, the digestate collected from each reactor at the end of each cycle, during the AD tests, were analysed to observe the changes to the composition, e.g., cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin with the continual operation of the AD reactors. For this purpose sequential fractionation of the digestate was employed and the results are depicted in Fig. 5 .

From Fig. 5(a), the fraction of cellulose in R_1 digestate was increased (24.29–29.13%) with sequential repeats of feeding in to reactor R_1 which was fed with untreated substrate mix. But less changes in hot water content was observed. The reactor R_1 received untreated CL and WS, hence the non-degradable lignin and cellulose, remained almost non-degraded and accumulated in the reactor with the repeated feeding, showing decrease in biogas production and lower VS removal (Fig. 2 and Table 4). As shown in Fig. 5(c), the hemicellulose (%) in the digestate showed no significant variation for R_1, i.e. little degradation occurred under the conditions tested. These results indicated hemicelluloses were not much accessible to the anaerobic microorganism under these conditions (Zhang et al., 2014). It has been reported that, cellulose was utilised in preference of hemicellulose during mesophilic and thermophilic AD in nitrogen-rich environment and were converted at a higher efficiency, because the metabolism of cellulose breakdown requires least investment of enzymes and energy (Zahan et al., 2018b). From Fig. 5(d), for 1st and 2nd cycle, lignin (%) in the digestate with untreated substrates was similar to feed lignin content. As the fractionation analysis is a gravitational analysis method of total fractions; therefore, the lignin content included the high amount of ash content of the substrates indicating no degradation of lignin. Lignin degradation of 15–20% under the AD was reported in literature because of the presence of some cellulolytic microbes in AD (Zahan et al., 2018b), however there will be still higher amount of lignin remaining inside the reactors. Therefore, pre-treatment to breakdown the bondage of lignin and hemicellulose are always suggested for enhancement in their removal (Zhang et al., 2014).

From Fig. 5, pre-treatment improved the degradation of the lignocellulosic components, with the fraction of cellulose being decreasing and the increase in hot water soluble contents in the reactors during the digestion. This indicated more soluble content were available for micro-organisms to produce biogas. For reactor R_2 and R_3, during 3rd and 4th cycle, where alkali treated CL and WS were fed, the decrease in cellulose was 26%–23% with an increase in hot water soluble content from 20% to 26% compared to R_1. For R_4, where both the pre-treated substrates were fed, the cellulose degradation was around 20% which is almost 40% less than the cellulose feedstock content. The hot water soluble contents increased to 30% compared to 14.3% in the initial feed. For 5th and 6th cycle, nearly around 22% degradation of cellulose and 90% increase in water soluble content were found for reactor R_2 and R_3 with the sequential alkali-acid pre-treated CL and WS feed. The highest amount of degradation of cellulose found was for R_4 which produced the maximum biogas. Almost 1.4 times increase in water soluble content and 0.43 times decrease in cellulose content were also observed compared to feedstock content, indicating sequential alkali-acid pre-treatment was effective in enhancing the biogas production. Overall, from Fig. 5(a) and (b), an inverse relationship was observed between the water soluble content and cellulose contents. This means that water soluble contents had strong correlation with the biogas production.

From Fig. 5(c), during 3rd and 4th cycle, hemicellulose content didn’t degrade much where alkali-treated substrate mixture was feed. This is because the breakdown of hemicellulose bondage was less during alkali pre-treatment (Fig. 1). During 5th and 6th cycle, degradation of hemicellulose was observed which is synchronised with their pre-treatment and biogas productions results (Figs. 1 and 2). From Fig. 5(d), lignin contents in the digestate collected from the reactor R_4 decreased, indicating slight degradation, where both the pre-treated CL and WS were fed. However, in most of the cases, the lignin content after digestion was found to be unchanged. This was probably due to the nature of the fractionation analysis method where the lignin content included the high amount of ash content as well as the inorganic content of the substrates at the end. This can be a limiting factor of this method for determining the lignin in the digestate mixture. However, it is still an indicative method for cellulose content for assessing the degradation process.

Therefore, the results showed a correlation between biogas production and carbohydrate content. The more the degradation of cellulose and water soluble content found in the reactors, the higher the biogas production. It can be concluded that, pre-treatment unlocks the shell structure of lignocellulose and make the biodegradable materials available to the microbes enabling almost double the biogas production.


3.5 Comparison of semi-solid and wet anaerobic digestion

The performance results of semi-solid AD (15% TS) were compared with their wet AD performances (4% TS) under batch and semi-continuous assays at mesophilic conditions (Zahan et al., 2018b,c) and were shown in Table 5 . The biogas production was 517.2 ± 12.6 mL_N biogas/g VS_added with the associated VS removal of 42.8% at 4% TS loading under batch assays. From semi-continuous anaerobic digestion at 4% TS feed (HRT 20 days), it was found to be have 366 mL_N biogas/g VS_added biogas production with a VS removal rate of 41.7%. Whereas, at 15% TS the biogas production was 321.8 ± 13.4 mL biogas/g VS_added which is almost 38% less biogas production compared to the batch assay at 4% TS as well as lower than biogas production from the semi-continuous AD. The VS removal of around 36.7% is also lower compared to wet digestion which is synchronised with the biogas production. This lower biogas production and VS removal is probably due to the substrate overloading at high TS conditions which led to ammonia accumulation and lower degradation of lignocellulosic substrates. Although the biogas production is 38% less in semi-solid AD (15% TS), the reactor size will be almost 3.75 times lower compared with wet AD. This will allow more waste feeding with less digestate handling; less heating and energy.

With pre-treatment, however, the biogas production can be improved and even possible to get higher biogas production than that at wet AD with untreated samples. From Table 5, biogas production of around 440–625 mL_N biogas/g VS_added can be achievable at high solid conditions (15% TS) with VS removal up to 55%. Therefore, these results indicate that the AD at semi-solid condition is possible, though required to take measures to mitigate the inhibitory parameters with untreated substrates. However, with pre-treated substrates, a continuous production of biogas is possible without any inhibition with possible reduction in total volume of the digester plant by four times.


4 Conclusions

CL can be successfully co-digested with agro-industrial wastes and food wastes under semi-solid conditions of 15% TS for feedstock of C/N ratio of 26.5 at mesophilic AD conditions. Biogas production using the sequential batch AD was 38% less than that at wet AD of 4% TS for untreated substrates. But sequential alkali-acid pre-treatment of the lignocellulosic substrates improved the biogas production by 88% with an associated VS reduction of around 55%. Therefore, this study provides strong evidence that ACoD at high TS can be achieved and offers promising opportunities compared to wet AD for agro-industrial wastes.


 Acknowledgements

The authors express their sincere appreciation to Renewable Future for providing samples and to co-funding this study.