TITLE: Accelerated high-solids anaerobic digestion of sewage sludge using low-temperature thermal pretreatment


1 Introduction

Bioenergy recovery from organic wastes is developing rapidly around the world because it can avoid the environmental pollution resulting from untreated wastes and reduce reliance on fossil fuel (Ratanatamskul et al., 2014; Neumann et al., 2015). Sewage sludge, a mostly organic waste discharged from municipal wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) as a byproduct, has tremendous potential for bioenergy recovery because thousands of WWTPs have been built worldwide during the last few decades. Anaerobic digestion is a widely used method to convert the organic matter in sludge to biogas (Nghiem et al., 2014). Although this process is a great success in most cases, its application is limited by spatial and economic factors. Conventional anaerobic digestion (CAD) commonly treats sludge with a total solids (TS) content of 2–5%, because the high viscosity of sludge at greater TS hampers mixing and mass transfer (Jolis, 2008). Due to the high water content in sludge, traditional digesters commonly require a huge operating volume; consequently, application of CAD is difficult in small WWTPs and in highly urbanized areas where space is limited (Duan et al., 2012). On the other hand, the organic content in sludge solids is sometimes lower than 50% due to special wastewater characteristics and treatment processes. During anaerobic digestion, the feedstock with low organic content usually results in low biogas production, and correspondingly reduces the benefit of anaerobic digestion.

To increase the applicability of anaerobic digestion, high-solids anaerobic digestion (HSAD) could be a feasible alternative to CAD. The solids concentration in HSAD reactors increased to 10–20%, and thus, smaller digesters requiring less energy for heating can be utilized (Guendouz et al., 2008). In addition, the volumetric biogas production (VBP) of high-solids digesters is significantly greater than that of conventional digesters (Liao et al., 2014). High-solids sludge can be readily obtained either by diluting dewatered sludge that has a TS content of approximately 20% or by concentrating (using centrifugation or filtration) sludge that has a TS lower than 2%. The disadvantages of HSAD include high energy consumption for agitation of digester contents due to the high viscosity of the solids, and restricted digestion due to blocked mass and heat transfer. Consequently, HSAD has been characterized with long digestion times or low organic removal rates associated with inefficient hydrolysis rates (Liao et al., 2014). The two negative effects partly counteract the benefits of HSAD. To date, the research on anaerobic mono-digestion of high-solids sludge is still very rare, and all the existing studies have addressed the problems by improving agitation (Duan et al., 2012; Liao et al., 2014).

Thermal pretreatment has been suggested as an effective method by which to accelerate hydrolysis during CAD of low-solids sludge, and thereby shorten digestion time and enhance biogas production (Li and Noike, 1992; Kim et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2015). Applying thermal pretreatment to HSAD is reasonable considering that CAD and HSAD are based on the same fundamental biochemical processes. Previous research on thermal treatment commonly has been conducted at high temperatures (160–180 °C) and high pressures (600–2500 kPa) (Carrère et al., 2010). Li and Noike (1992) found that compared to no pretreatment, a 60-min thermal treatment of sludge at the optimum temperature of 170 °C increased methane production by 100% during the subsequent anaerobic digestion. Kim et al. (2003) found that the destruction of volatile solids (VS) increased by 30% after 30 min thermal treatment at 121 °C. Furthermore, Bougrier et al. (2007) achieved maximum methane production at 135–190 °C that was 25% higher than from the control. However, recalcitrant soluble organics or toxic-inhibitory intermediates can be produced that reduce the biodegradability of thermally treated sludge when the treatment temperature exceeds 180 °C (Wilson and Novak, 2009).

Until now, most research on thermal pretreatment of sludge has used high temperature accompanied with high pressure. However, high-temperature treatment entails huge energy consumption, places strict demands on devices and incurs high costs, which largely offset the overall benefit of this method (Appels et al., 2010). In order to overcome these drawbacks, low-temperature thermal pretreatment (50–90 °C) has gained attention in recent years. Like treatment at higher temperatures, thermal pretreatment at 50–90 °C can also solubilize organic substances in sludge solids and decompose lipids to volatile fatty acids (VFAs) (Ferrer et al., 2008; Appels et al., 2010). Due to the improved sludge hydrolysis resulting from thermal pretreatment, methane production increased by 11% after 48 h pretreatment at 50 °C (Nges and Liu, 2009), and by 30–50% after 9 h thermal pretreatment at 70 °C (Ferrer et al., 2008; Climent et al., 2007) compared to methane yields achieved without thermal pretreatment.

In previous works, low-temperature thermal pretreatment has been proved to be an effective method by which to improve CAD treating sludge having 2–5% TS. In theory, thermal pretreatment can not only enhance the hydrolysis of sludge particles and macromolecular organic substances, but also decrease the viscosity of high-solids sludge. In fact, sludge becomes more fluid when its temperature increases (Baudez et al., 2013; Farno et al., 2014). Therefore, low-temperature thermal pretreatment is a potential option for improving HSAD by decreasing sludge viscosity and accelerating sludge hydrolysis. A search of the scientific literature revealed that no such research has been reported on low-temperature thermal pretreatment prior to HSAD of sewage sludge. In the current work, high-solids sewage sludge with TS 15% was subjected to thermal treatment at temperature 50–80 °C for 15–90 min, and then the dissolution of sludge was investigated by evaluating the release of COD, VFAs and nitrogen. Moreover, the influence of thermal treatment on the viscosity of high-solids sludge was also analyzed. After that, anaerobic digestion experiments of thermally treated high-solids sludge were conducted at mesophilic condition, and the effect of low temperature thermal pretreatment on anaerobic digestion was evaluated by monitoring biogas production and digestion time.


2 Materials and methods

The research reported herein was guided by previously reported work (Appels et al., 2010). High-solids sludge with 15% TS was subjected to thermal treatment at temperature 50–80 °C for 15–90 min. Subsequently, the dissolution of sludge was investigated by evaluating the release of chemical oxygen demand (COD), VFAs and nitrogen. In addition, the influence of thermal treatment on the viscosity of the high-solids sludge was analyzed. Batch anaerobic digestion of the thermally treated sludge was conducted to optimize pretreatment conditions, and these optimized conditions were applied to a pilot scale semi-continuous HSAD. The effect of the low-temperature thermal pretreatment on anaerobic digestion was evaluated by measuring biogas production and digestion time. Based on these, the feasibility of enhancing bioenergy recovery from sewage sludge through HSAD assisted by low-temperature thermal pretreatment was evaluated.


2.1 Sludge samples

Dewatered sludge was collected from a full-scale WWTP at Kunming City, China; the plant used an Anaerobic–Anoxic–Oxic (AAO) process. The discharged sludge, composed of primary sludge and waste sludge, was conditioned with polyacrylamide and dewatered to a water content of approximately 80% using a belt filter press. The carbon-to-nitrogen (C/N) ratio of the dewatered sludge was 6–9. The dewatered sludge was first diluted using deionized water, and the diluted dewatered sludge (TS 15%, VS/TS 50.7% and pH 6.7) was used as the substrate in batch anaerobic digestion experiments and in semi-continuous digestion experiments. The inoculum used in the batch experiments was the digested sludge (TS 13.3%, VS/TS 40.6% and pH 8.0) discharged from a semi-continuous digester treating feed sludge having TS 15%. The digester had been operated steadily for about one year, with an organic removal rate of 40% and a specific biogas production of 380 mL/g VS added. During the semi-continuous digestion experiments, the VS content in the feed sludge solids fluctuated between 50.4 and 54.5%.


2.2 Thermal sludge treatment at low temperatures

Before thermal treatment, the characteristics of sludge samples were measured at ambient temperature (25 ± 2 °C). Thermal treatment was performed in 500-mL stainless steel tubes, which could be sealed with rubber plugs. After 400 mL of sludge sample was injected into a tube, the tube was sealed and submerged in a controlled thermostatic water bath (XMTD-4000, Yongguangming Instrument, Beijing, China). Samples were treated at temperatures between 50 °C and 80 °C for durations that varied from 15 to 90 min. Treatment duration was measured from the time when the temperature of the samples first reached the predefined values. Following thermal treatment, the tubes were immediately immersed into cold water so that the temperature of the sludge samples decreased rapidly to 33 °C, which was the lower limit temperature used in mesophilic anaerobic digestion.

The disruption of sludge flocs and microbial cells was expressed as “disintegration degree” (DD_COD, %), which was defined as the ratio of the increase in soluble chemical oxygen demand (SCOD) caused by thermal treatment to the maximum possible SCOD increase (i.e., the difference between total COD and the SCOD prior to treatment). Disintegration degree was calculated using Eq. (1): FORMULA: DD COD = ( SCOD − SCOD 0 ) / ( TCOD − SCOD 0 ) × 100 % in which SCOD_0 is the initial SCOD of untreated sludge, and TCOD is the total COD.

Before and after thermal treatment, sludge viscosity was measured using a rate-controlled viscometer (SNB-2, Nirun, Shanghai, China) fitted with the Searle system consisting of a rotational spindle and a beaker. The viscometer was equipped with five different spindles (No. 0–4). For high-solids sludge, spindle No. 4 was used, which had a measuring range of 6006–6,000,000 mPa s. The shear rates were obtained by multiplying measuring speeds with a conversion factor of 0.209. Before measurement, sludge samples were stirred to ensure the samples were homogeneous; however, stirring was done gently and briefly to avoid irreversible influence on the samples. The prepared sludge sample (400 mL) was put into a 400-mL beaker (having a body diameter of 82 mm), and the spindle of the viscometer was immersed into the sample until the spindle indicator line was just below the sample surface. The measuring speed (the spindle speed) was set between 5 and 90 rpm, and the corresponding shear rates ranged from 1.05 to 18.81 s^−1. The measuring time was set as 30 s during the test to avoid inaccurate results arising from the sedimentation of heavy particles in sludge suspension.


2.3 Batch HSAD experiments

After thermal pretreatment, the treated substrate sludge (125 g) was mixed with the inoculum (125 g), and the mixture was added into bottles (500 mL) for batch anaerobic digestion experiments. Lopes et al. (2004) recommended a 1:1 ratio as the optimal ratio of inoculum VS to substrate VS (R_I/S) for maximum biogas production. Some studies reported that the best biogas yield occurred at R_I/S 0.625, and that the apparent kinetic coefficient for VS degradation was constant when R_I/S ranged from 1.5 to 0.7 (Liu et al., 2009; Raposoa et al., 2010). In the present study, the R_I/S was set at 0.7 according to the proportion of inoculum and substrate in the mixture. After the mixture was added, the bottles were flushed with N_2 to remove O_2, and then immediately sealed with rubber plugs. The batch anaerobic digestion experiments were conducted in a shaking water bath (SHA-C, ZhongDa Instrument, Shanghai, China) at a shaking frequency of 60 times per minute and a constant temperature of 35 ± 2 °C. The biogas production was determined from the displacement of a saturated sodium chloride solution, as described by Liao et al. (2014). A “blank” digester containing only 250 g inoculum and a control digester containing 125 g inoculum and 125 g untreated sludge were operated simultaneously with all other digestion experiments. For each treatment combination of temperature and duration, duplicate batch digesters were operated and the data from each pair were averaged for use in performance analyses. Each batch digestion experiment was conducted until biogas production ceased.


2.4 Semi-continuous HSAD experiments

A pilot scale digester consisting of a cylindrical reactor with a conical bottom was used to conduct semi-continuous HSAD experiments. The total volume of the digester was 500 L and the working volume was 450 L. An electric stirring system was designed and equipped in the digester to improve the mass transfer in high-solids sludge. The stirring system was composed of a frame agitator and three oblique blades, and operated intermittently (3 h stirring and 3 h off) at a rate of 60 rpm. A water bath jacket with an electric heating system was used to keep the reaction temperature at 35 ± 2 °C. Once a day, a certain quantity of digested sludge was discharged at a fixed time after which the same quantity of feed sludge was added manually. The biogas production was measured using a wet-gas flow meter. The composition of biogas was measured using a biogas analyzer (BIOGAS 5000, Geotech, Leamington Spa, UK). The characteristics of digestate were measured to evaluate the performance of anaerobic digestion. The removal rate of sludge organic matter (VS_re, %) was calculated using Eq. (2), assuming that the mass of the inorganic fraction remained constant during anaerobic digestion. FORMULA: VS re = ( VS 0 − VS t ) / [ VS 0 × ( 1 − VS t ) ] × 100 %

In Eq. (2), VS_0 is the VS content in feed sludge solids, %; and VS_t is the VS content in digested sludge solids, %.

The operation of the digester was divided into three stages. In stage 1, from the beginning to the 66th day, the diluted dewatered sludge (TS 15%) was fed into the digester and the solids retention time (SRT) was set at 22 days. In stage 2, from the 67th to the 136th day, the feed sludge was first thermally treated (70 °C for 30 min, determined from the batch experiments to be the optimal combination of temperature and duration) and then added into the digester. The SRT in stage 2 was also 22 days. In stage 3, from the 137th to 175th day, the digester was also fed with thermally treated sludge but the SRT was shortened to 15 days. Correspondingly, the organic loading rate (OLR) varied from 3.6 to 5.6 g/(L d) during the 175-day experiment.

To evaluate the extent of digestion (termed “digestion degree”), the biogas yields of both the digested sludge (250 g) and the mixture of the digested sludge (125 g) and the feed sludge (125 g) were determine until biogas production ceased, using the similar method described in Section 2.3. The two yields were defined as V _d and V _m, respectively. For each temperature-duration combination, duplicate batch digesters were operated until no more biogas was produced, and the data were averaged for the calculation of digestion degree. The maximum possible biogas yield of the feed sludge (125 g) can be calculated by [V _m − (V _d/2)] and the value of the digested sludge (125 g) was (V _d/2). Thus, the digestion degree (D _d, %) of feed sludge was defined using Eq. (3). FORMULA: D d = { [ V m − ( V d / 2 ) ] − ( V d / 2 ) } / [ V m − ( V d / 2 ) ] × 100 % = ( V m − V d ) / [ V m − ( V d / 2 ) ] × 100 %


2.5 Other analytical methods

The physical and chemical parameters TS, VS, total alkalinity (ALK), total nitrogen (TN), total ammonia nitrogen (TAN), COD and total phosphorus (TP) were determined according to standard methods (MEP, 2002). To determine the soluble parameters, thermally treated sludge and digested sludge were first centrifuged at 6000 rpm (4346 g) for 10 min, and the supernatant was filtered through membranes with mesh size of 0.45 μm. The filtrate was analyzed for soluble parameters. The VFAs were determined using a colorimetric method (Montgomery et al., 1962). Free ammonia nitrogen (FAN) was calculated using the procedure of Hansen et al. (1998). The pH was determined using a pH meter (PHS-3C, Shanghai, China). The C/N ratio was determined using an elemental analyzer (vario EL cube, Elementar, Hanau, Germany).


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Effect of thermal treatment on sludge hydrolysis

The characteristics of the supernatant of thermally treated sludge are shown in Fig. 1 . The released organic matter can be evaluated by examining the variation in SCOD. The SCOD increased rapidly in the first 15 min, but more slowly as an experiment continued. Compared with the treatment duration, treatment temperature played a more important role in the dissolution of organic matter in sludge solids. When the temperature increased from 50 to 60, 70 and 80 °C, the SCOD increased by 32.3, 45.3, 52.5 and 57.6 times, respectively, after 30 min thermal treatment. This showed that 70 °C and 80 °C were better for low-temperature thermal treatment than 50 °C and 60 °C.

After 30 min thermal treatment at 50, 60,70 and 80 °C, the DD_COD values were 4.9%, 9.1%, 13.0% and 16.6%, respectively. It was noted that the degree of disintegration obtained at 80 °C was much lower than that previously reported for high-temperature thermal treatment. For example, the solubilization rate of COD was 34% after 30 min thermal treatment at 135 °C in the study by Bougrier et al. (2007) and was 60% after pretreatment at 170 °C in the study by Li and Noike (1992). Compared to these values, the results from the present study indicated that high-temperature thermal treatment has a better disintegration effect than thermal treatment at low temperatures. On the other hand, the result in the present study was similar to that obtained in a previous study on digestion of low-solids sludge (TS 6.6% and VS/TS 69.9%) after 60 min treatment at 70 °C (Appels et al., 2010), leading to the deduction that the disintegration effect on sludge was only slightly influenced by sludge solids content (in the approximate TS range 6–15%). A similar phenomenon regarding disintegration degree was also found during alkaline sludge treatment (Li et al., 2015). Hence, increasing the sludge solids concentration can effectively reduce the energy required for heating sludge during thermal treatment, and from this perspective, low-temperature thermal pretreatment is especially suitable for HSAD.

The increase in SCOD was owing to the release and dissolution of organic substances in sludge solids, but the fates of proteins, carbohydrates and lipids were different during this process. Due to the degradation of organic polymers (Bougrier et al., 2008), a significant increase in VFA concentration was observed in the thermally treated sludge (Fig. 1). Higher treatment temperature apparently led to more production of VFAs, but the effect of treatment duration was limited. VFAs can also be produced due to the strengthened activity of thermophilic or hyper-thermophilic bacteria at 70 °C, but this effect was observed only after 9 h treatment (Ferrer et al., 2008). Although the produced VFAs increased the accessible substrate for methanogenesis, the accumulated undissociated VFAs possibly diffused passively into cells and disrupted homeostasis. The VFAs concentration of 400 mg/L was recognized to be the threshold for slight inhibition during HSAD (Duan et al., 2012). Therefore, the influence of the produced VFAs on the subsequent anaerobic digestion should be noted. The low pH of about 6.0 was not the best condition for anaerobic digestion. However, a feed sludge with low pH may improve the acid–base balance in HSAD, which can create a weak alkaline environment in digestate (Duan et al., 2012; Liao et al., 2014).

The increased soluble nitrogen in the thermally treated sludge demonstrated the degradation of proteins, but the deamination of amino acids originating from proteins was limited. Moreover, the effect of treatment temperature on the concentration of soluble ammonia was slight. During HSAD, there was no inhibition or only slight inhibition when TAN was lower than 2000 mg/L (Duan et al., 2012). Therefore, the dissolved ammonia during thermal pretreatment would not impact the subsequent anaerobic digestion. Due to the increase in soluble ammonia, the alkalinity of the thermally treated sludge increased a little, but the ratio of VFAs to ALK was still much higher than the threshold below which stable operation of anaerobic digestion would be threatened (Duan et al., 2012).

Thus, among the released substances during thermal treatment, the high concentration of VFAs was a key risk that could cause the subsequent anaerobic digestion to deteriorate. The effect of increased VFAs was further addressed in the batch anaerobic digestion experiments. The amino-carbonyl reaction (browning reaction) is another potential adverse factor arising during thermal pretreatment of sludge. The brown color of a sludge lysate has been attributed to the products of the amino-carbonyl reaction, and some of the products have been shown to be difficult to degrade. In the present study, the sludge supernatant did not turn brown at low temperatures, indicating that amino-carbonyl reactions did not occur.


3.2 Effect of thermal treatment on sludge viscosity

Sludge viscosity influences its fluid properties and thereby determines stirring performance. To ensure adequate mixing, high energy input for stirring is necessary in HSAD of sewage sludge. If the viscosity of high-solids sludge could be decreased by thermal pretreatment, the energy required for stirring would be lessened and the mass transfer would be improved. Based on the Ostwald (power law) model, the relationship between apparent viscosities and shear rates can be expressed as Eq. (4). FORMULA: μ = k · γ n − 1

In Eq. (4), γ is the shear rate (s^−1), k is the flow consistency index (Pa·s^n), μ is the apparent viscosity (Pa·s) and n is the flow behavior index. To gather data for use in Eq. (4), the variation in sludge viscosities as a function of shear rates was measured twice at different treatment temperatures (Fig. 2 ), and the parameters describing the graphical relationships were also calculated (Table 1 ). The measured data were well described by the Ostwald model, indicating that the sludge behaved as pseudoplastic fluid.

The two viscosity tests showed that sludge flowability increased as treatment temperature increased, and the values of n had a good linear correlation with treatment temperatures (R^2 were 0.9775 and 0.9944 for the two tests). The relationship between treatment temperature and sludge flowability can be possibly explained by the status of individual sludge particles in the suspension. In high-solids sludge, sludge particles are linked or bound by extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) in their surface layer, leading to a large frictional resistance and thereby a high viscosity. During thermal treatment, some EPS, including carbohydrates, proteins and lipids, were detached, dissolved and even decomposed (Appels et al., 2010), which probably disrupted the links between sludge particles and lessened the apparent viscosity. A similar observation was reported by Farno et al. (2014).

The effect of thermal treatment on sludge viscosity has always been reported to be irreversible because the decomposition of proteins, carbohydrates and lipids is irreversible (Baudez et al., 2013; Farno et al., 2014). However, the viscosity of the thermally treated sludge in the present research indeed recovered in some degree when the sludge temperature declined from 50 to 80 °C during pretreatment to 33 °C during digestion. After the pretreatment at 80 °C, sludge viscosity decreased by 48.6% at a shear rate of 2.1 s^−1, compared to the viscosity of untreated sludge. When the sludge temperature returned to 33 °C, the sludge viscosity increased, but it was still 32.2% lower than that of the untreated sludge. Previous research proved that proteins and carbohydrates in the EPS network are only partly degraded during short-duration, low-temperature thermal treatment (Appels et al., 2010). Therefore, in the present study, as sludge temperature decreased the undecomposed EPS possibly intertwined again and also relinked to the surface of sludge particles, such that the sludge became sticky again. Nevertheless, due to the degradation of some EPS and the disintegration of flocs, the recovered viscosities were still lower than the viscosity of the untreated sludge.

In general, diffusive coefficients are inversely proportional to fluid viscosities, and their relationship can be expressed by Stocks–Einstein formula (Squires and Brady, 2005). Consequently, the decreased viscosity resulted from thermal pretreatment can enhance the mass transfer in digestate. On the other hand, the power requirement for stirring is positively related to viscosity, and thus, energy consumption by stirring decreases owning to thermal treatment.


3.3 Effect of thermal pretreatment on batch HSAD

In theory, thermal pretreatment of sludge can improve HSAD by enhancing the solubilization and hydrolysis of organic substances in the sludge solids. However, thermal pretreatment also can possibly cause the subsequent anaerobic digestion process to deteriorate because the treatment releases high concentration of VFAs and depresses pH. These two possibilities were addressed in batch anaerobic digestion experiments.

The negative effects did not occur and thermal pretreatment accelerated HSAD significantly (Fig. 3 ). After thermally treated sludge was mixed with the inoculum containing soluble VFAs of 266.5 ± 15.3 mg/L, the soluble VFAs in the thermally treated sludge decreased to 600–750 mg/L (Table 2 ). This concentration still possibly resulted in a slight inhibition of digestion (Duan et al., 2012), but the biogas production did not deteriorate in the present study because VFAs were rapidly converted to biogas in the initial stage of digestion. When the digestion was completed, the concentration of soluble VFAs decreased to below 200 mg/L. On the other hand, the pH also increased to about 7.6 after treated sludge was mixed with the inoculum, and then pH increased further to 8.1 (Table 2) due to the consumption of VFAs and the release of ammonia. Thus, the variations in VFA concentration and pH, resulting from thermal pretreatment, did not hamper the performance of the batch HSAD.

In contrast to the reductions in SCOD and VFAs due to thermal treatment, the concentration of TN in the supernatant, mainly derived from ammonia, increased significantly during the digestion of the thermally treated sludge (Table 2). However, the concentrations of TAN and FAN were very close to the thresholds of TAN (2000 mg/L) and FAN (250 mg/L) required for anaerobic digestion, and possibly resulted in a slight inhibition to anaerobic processes (Duan et al., 2012). The release of ammonia also increased the alkalinity, which counteracted the effect of the high concentration of VFAs in the thermally treated sludge. A similarly weak alkaline environment was observed during continuous HSAD in a previous study (Liao and Li, 2015).

When the digestion completed in 20 days, the specific biogas production per unit VS added (SBP_ad) increased by 7.3%, 15.6% and 24.4%, respectively after 30 min thermal pretreatment at 60 °C, 70 °C and 80 °C (Table 3 ), compared to that from the control digesters. These increments were close to the previously reported value of 13.4% reported by Kim et al. (2003) after 30 min thermal treatment at 121 °C, and were only a little lower than the value of 25% obtained after thermal pretreatment at 190 °C (Bougrier et al., 2007). Compared with high-temperature thermal pretreatments reported elsewhere, the low-temperature thermal pretreatments in the present study were similarly effective in enhancing biogas production from anaerobic digestion. These results indicate that for anaerobic microorganisms, the accessibility of organic substances in sludge solids was improved due to low-temperature thermal pretreatment, even if these substances were not dissolved into the liquid phase to the same extent as achieved in high-temperature thermal pretreatment. On the other hand, the increase in SBP_ad was less than 30% even though the digestion time was long enough, suggesting that the increase in available biodegradable substances in feed sludge was limited. The SBP_ad values were lower than the common range of 300–500 mL/g associated with anaerobic digestion, which could be attributed to inadequate agitation using the shaking water bath for the batch experiments.

Despite the limited increase in SBP_ad, the biogas production as a function of time changed dramatically after thermal pretreatment at low temperatures (Fig. 3), with pretreated sludge generating higher gas production rates initially than untreated sludge. This change showed that the rate-limiting step for biogas production was effectively relieved by thermal treatment, and that the rate of biogas production was accelerated by the dissolution of organic substances in sludge solids. The expression in Eq. (5) for biogas production assumes there is a proportional relationship between the degraded VS and the biogas yield (Raposoa et al., 2010). FORMULA: G = G m ( 1 − e − k · t )

In Eq. (5), G is the biogas production at a certain time t, G _m is the maximum biogas production, and k is the apparent kinetic constant for biogas production. Using this model with observed data, the apparent kinetic constants for biogas production can be calculated (Table 3). Statistical analyses (t-tests) showed that Eq. (5) closely predicted the experimental data. The kinetic constant doubled after short-duration thermal pretreatment at both 70 °C and 80 °C compared to the rate constant for the control (no pretreatment) samples. Due to the accelerated digestion rate, the time required for completing digestion was shortened from 20 d to 5 d after thermal pretreatment at 70 °C and at 80 °C. Considering the similar effects produced by sludge treatment at the two temperatures, yet the lower energy consumption at the lower temperature, 70 °C was identified as the optimum pretreatment temperature of those investigated.


3.4 Effect of thermal pretreatment on semi-continuous HSAD

Thermal pretreatment at 70 °C was applied to a pilot-scale digester to verify its effect on semi-continuous HSAD equipped with adequate agitation. During the whole period of anaerobic digestion, the variations of biogas production, organic removal rate and other parameters were measured, from which the average performances were statistically calculated (Table 4 ).

In stage 1 (initial 66 days), the system was operated steadily at a OLR of 3.4 g/(L d), which was much higher than the common range of 0.6–1.6 g/(L d) (Appels et al., 2008). Nevertheless, the pH remained stable at 7.8. The concentrations of VFAs and FAN were lower than 400 mg/L and 250 mg/L, respectively, indicating the system was operating in a satisfactory status. The specific biogas production (SBP_ad) of 365.2 mL/g VS added and the VS_re of 32.5% were very close to the previously report performance of CAD when fed a similar type of sludge at the same SRT (Li et al., 2013). The results verified that HSAD with adequate agitation can perform as well as low-solids anaerobic digestion. Hence, increasing feed TS (converting CAD to HSAD) would probably increase VBP proportionally.

After low temperature thermal pretreatment (stage 2), the average SBP_ad of the digester increased by 11.7% compared to that in stage 1, but the specific biogas production per unit VS removed (SBP_re) was almost identical to that in stage 1. Thus, the increment in biogas yield was mainly attributed to the degradation of additional organic substances released as the result of thermal treatment. However, the increase in biogas yield was limited, as had been exhibited previously in the batch experiments. Thus, even if the dissolved organic substances during thermal pretreatment had not undergone the treatment, most of them could have been utilized by anaerobic microorganism in a long digestion time. The concentrations of TN, TAN and FAN in the supernatant increased slightly, but remained lower than the thresholds that inhibit anaerobic digestion. The ratio of VFAs to TA was also very low indicating that the digester maintained a stable status. Use of thermally treated sludge did not change the acid–base balance in the digester or increase the VFAs concentration significantly. Thus, thermal pretreatment had almost no negative influence on HSAD, although the positive effect on accumulative biogas production was limited.

However, as described in the batch experiments, some changes indeed occurred due to thermal pretreatment. In the first half of one digestion cycle, the biogas production rate (biogas yield per hour and per gram VS added) increased obviously after thermally treated sludge was fed into the digester (i.e., in stage 2) even when the SRT remained at 22 days as in stage 1, when untreated sludge was being digested (Fig. 4 ). It indicated that the digestion time could be shortened because of pretreatment. In fact, when the SRT was shortened to 15 days, the digester exhibited a similar performance as it did with an SRT of 22 days (Table 4). Moreover, the variation in biogas production rate in one cycle was also close to that at SRT 22 days (Fig. 4). According to Eq. (3), the average digestion degree of the thermally treated sludge was 89.8% when the SRT was 15 days (V _m and V _d were measured to be 1378 ± 239 mL and 258 ± 18 mL, respectively, using the method described in Section 2.4); this was only a little lower than the 92.4% obtained when the SRT was 22 days (V _m and V _d were 1216 ± 239 mL and 171 ± 18 mL, respectively). Based on these comparisons, low-temperature thermal pretreatment effectively accelerated the hydrolysis of substrate and shortened the digestion time from 22 days to 15 days.

On the other hand, the concentrations of TN, TAN and FAN in the supernatant all increased significantly due to the shortened digestion time (Table 4); however, they remained lower than the thresholds that cause inhibition. The average concentration of VFAs exceeded 440 mg/L, and was related to a risk of slight inhibition (Duan et al., 2012). However, a high concentration of VFAs only occurred at the beginning of stage 3, and then it decreased gradually to below 400 mg/L. The initial increase in VFAs concentration was mainly attributed to the sharp variation in OLR. The accumulated VFAs correspondingly decreased pH to 7.8–7.9. Compared with that at SRT 22 days, the biogas production rate also decreased at the initial stage of one cycle due to the shock loading (Fig. 4). Nevertheless, the system rapidly stabilized when the anaerobic microorganisms acclimated to the high-OLR environment.

Due to the shortened SRT, the VBP of the digester increased further to 2.1 L/(L d), which was almost 4–10 times that achievable with CAD (Appels et al., 2008). Moreover, the methane content of the biogas also increased to 66%, possibly owing to the shift of metabolic pathways under high OLR (Motte et al., 2013). Both of these variations enhance bioenergy recovery from sewage sludge. On the other hand, low-temperature thermal pretreatment increases the energy consumption of the overall anaerobic digestion process compared to digestion without thermal treatment, but the increment is much less than that resulting from high-temperature thermal pretreatment. Moreover, the increased energy consumption can be partly offset by the increased biogas production and energy savings due to shortened digestion time. For a given sludge feed rate, when the SRT is shorted from 22 to 15 days, the volume of the digester can be reduced by 32%, and correspondingly the heat dissipating surface can be reduced by about 23% (assuming a digester height is twice the diameter). In addition, results from the present study show that the stirring energy consumption was reduced due to the effect of thermal treatment in reducing sludge viscosity. On the whole, the energy consumption was greater for HSAD with thermal pretreatment than without, but the treatment capacity of digesters increased. The increased treatment capacity that was made possible by thermal pretreatment effectively reduced the footprint of a digester, which would enhance the feasibility of implementing HSAD in small WWTPs and in urban areas where the amount of physical space is limited.


4 Conclusions

Thermal hydrolysis at low temperatures is an effective pretreatment method by which to accelerate high-solids anaerobic digestion of sewage sludge. During thermal sludge treatment, treatment temperature plays a more important role than treatment duration. After low temperature thermal treatment, a large amount of organic matter in sludge solids is dissolved, and sludge flowability is enhanced significantly. Within the range of temperatures and treatment durations investigated, thermal pretreatment at 70 °C for 30 min is optimal. Because of the accelerated hydrolysis and the decreased viscosity of thermally treated sludge, the accumulative biogas production can be increased more than 10%, and the digestion time can be shortened significantly. Combined with low-temperature thermal pretreatment, high-solids anaerobic digesters have much higher treatment capability and better applicability in small wastewater treatment plants than do conventional digesters.