TITLE: Improving biogas production from different parts of spruce tree using leading pretreatments


1 Introduction

In recent years, public awareness of the environmental issues associated with the use of fossil fuels has increased. It is well accepted that fossil fuels production and consumption play an important role in climate change. This has aroused the interest of the scientific community in finding alternative renewable energy resources like biofuels [1,2].

Biogas is a biofuel that is produced through the microbial degradation of organic matter under anaerobic conditions. Anaerobic digestion of organic matter for biogas production consists of four stages including hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis, and methanogenesis, in which insoluble and complex organic compounds are decomposed into methane and carbon dioxide [3–5].

Lignocellulosic biomass, including agricultural residues, energy crops, and forestry residues, are attractive substrates for biogas production because of their low costs and high availability. The main element of forestry residues is wood, which is divided into two categories: softwoods (e.g., spruce and pine) and hardwoods (e.g., aspen and birch), varying in chemical and structural properties. Softwoods are more recalcitrant to anaerobic digestion due to their higher lignin content compared to hardwoods. Spruce is an opportunistic softwood tree species with a great ability to grow that plays a crucial role in revitalizing forests in devastated areas. Because of its great characteristics, spruce is an abundant tree around the world and in the northern hemisphere with high amounts of waste produce from the forestry, sawmills, and pulp and paper mills operations. Besides, spruce wastes are one of the most recalcitrant lignocellulosic materials to be decomposed or converted into biofuels. The resistance of lignocelluloses to bioconversion into biofuels is caused by different factors, including the high degree of cellulose crystallinity, the unavailability of cellulose for microorganisms and enzymes caused by lignin and hemicellulose coverage, non-productive catalytic binding of lignin to enzymes, and partial inhibition by degradation products of hemicellulose and lignin for cellulase enzymes [6–8]. The resistance of spruce to microbial and enzymatic bioconversion is mainly related to lower xylose and arabinose contents, lower methoxy content in its lignin structure, and higher lignin content, as compared to other woods [9]. Therefore, a pretreatment process is necessary before anaerobic digestion for efficient conversion.

Different pretreatments have been employed for the improvement of softwood digestion [3]. The pretreatments should modify the regular structure, weaken the bonds between lignin, hemicellulose, and cellulose, yield the highest possible level of hydrolytic enzyme and microorganisms penetration and reduce the crystallinity [10–12].

Acid pretreatment, among the oldest pretreatment initiated in the 19th century, is based on acid hydrolysis and can be performed using concentrated or dilute acids. Acid pretreatment breaks down hemicellulose into its monomers and oligomers [13,14]. As a result, hemicellulose is dissolved and the cellulose content is increased [15]. Dilute sulfuric acid pretreatments also have high reaction efficiencies and significantly improve cellulose hydrolysis by hydrolytic enzymes and microorganisms. Dilute acid pretreatment using a concentration of 1–5 % is more desirable than concentrated acid pretreatment using a concentration of 30–70 % considering environmental and economic reasons.

Concentrated phosphoric acid (>81 %) is an ideal solvent for cellulose because of performing at low temperatures and availability at a low price, as compared with other solvents like ionic liquids. Phosphoric acid dissolves cellulose in the presence of water, and cellulose reconstitutes in an amorphous form that is ready to be hydrolyzed [16–18].

Organosolv pretreatments are among the most effective types of pretreatment and showed promising results on softwoods. These pretreatments extract lignin from lignocellulosic structures, which makes it a suitable choice for lignocellulosic materials with high lignin content, including softwoods [19–21]. Organosolv pretreatment uses a mixture of organic or aqueous-organic solvents with mineral acid catalysts, such as sulfuric and hydrochloric acid, to break the internal bonds between lignin and hemicellulose. Organic solvents applied in the organosolv processes include methanol, ethanol, acetone, ethylene glycol, trimethylene glycol, and tetrahydroforphuryl alcohol. Ethanol pretreatment is among the most effective, non-toxic, and inexpensive methods of softwood pretreatment [19,22].

There are a few published studies on the improvement of biogas production from softwood spruce. Steam pretreatment of spruce wastes was studied for biogas production by Janzon et al. [23]. The optimum conditions were steaming at 220 °C supplemented with 2.4 % SO₂, resulting in 55 % carbohydrate enzymatic hydrolysis yield. Alkali pretreatment of spruce, as well as hardwood birch, was evaluated on anaerobic digestion using NaOH and different combinations of NaOH, thiourea, urea, and polyethylene glycol at − 15 °C [24,25]. The alkali pretreatment was more effective on the hardwood and the maximum biogas yield for spruce was<50 % of the theoretical yield. N-methylmorpholine-N-oxide is an industrial solvent used for fiber production from pure cellulose and Teghammar et al. [24] used this pretreatment for the improvement of biogas production from spruce. However, the solvent needs to be recovered (which is costly for woods), and pretreatment needs a long time (15 h) processing at 130 °C.

To our knowledge, there is no publication on applying acid and organosolv pretreatments to improve biogas production from spruce. Moreover, no study has also been published tending to enhance biogas production yield from different parts of a spruce tree.

The main purpose of this study was to improve the anaerobic digestion of different parts of spruce trees, including leaves, wood, branches, bark, fruit, and their mixture. For this purpose, the efficiency of concentrated phosphoric acid, organosolv, and dilute sulfuric acid pretreatments were assessed on biogas yield from different parts of the spruce tree. All pretreated solids and pretreatment liquors were considered for biogas production, and total produced biomethane was evaluated to find the suitability of pretreatments. The effects of pretreatment on changing the composition of substrates were measured. Moreover, the changes in the lignocelluloses structures through the pretreatments were monitored with SEM and FTIR analyses.


2 Material and methods


2.1 Feedstocks and inoculum

Different parts of a spruce tree, including leaves, branches, bark, wood, fruit, and their mixture were obtained from the forest of Isfahan University of Technology (Isfahan, Iran). They were individually cut into small pieces, milled to obtain chips of<2 cm, dried at room temperature, and then screened to achieve powder with particle size between 295 and 833 µm (20 and 80 mesh No.). The powdered substrates were kept in plastic bags at room temperature until use.

The inoculum for anaerobic digestion was obtained from a 7000 m^3 anaerobic biogas digester (Isfahan Municipal Wastewater Treatment plant, Isfahan, Iran) working at 37 °C. The inoculum was incubated at 37 °C for a week to consume the nutrients. To adopt the inoculum with lignocellulosic substrates, it was fed every-five days with 1 gVS per litter of the mixture of different parts for three months. This adapted inoculum was used for all anaerobic digestion.


2.2 Pretreatments

Phosphoric acid, organosolv, and sulfuric acid pretreatments were performed on different parts of spruce tree, and the digestibilities of pretreatment solids and liquors were evaluated. The solid fraction of the pretreatment was referred to as pretreated substrate, and the liquid fraction of the pretreatment was referred to as pretreatment liquor in the present research.


2.2.1 Phosphoric acid pretreatment

Concentrated phosphoric acid pretreatment was performed based on the method developed and optimized by Zhang et al. [26]. One g of the dry substrate was weighed into 50 mL centrifuge tube, mixed with 8 mL of phosphoric acid (83 ∼ 85.9 %), and placed in the water bath at 50 °C for 50 min. Then, 20 mL of cold acetone was added to each tube, stirred well, and centrifuged (Selecta lab, TDZ5-WS, Shanghai Lu Xiangyi) at 3400 rpm for 20 min. The supernatants were separated, and 40 mL of distilled water was added to the tubes and centrifuged. The washing process with distilled water and centrifuging was repeated two more times. The overhead liquids containing distilled water were poured into a container and heated on a heater until the stench of acetone was removed and then placed in the freezer to be used for anaerobic digestion as phosphoric acid-pretreatment liquor. After washing with water to reach pH 7.0, the pretreated solids were dried in an oven at 40 °C, weighed, and stored in sealable plastic bags until further analysis and anaerobic digestion.


2.2.2 Organosolv pretreatment

Organosolv pretreatment was carried out using ethanol (75 % v/v) at 150 °C for 30 min, the optimum conditions obtained by Mirmohamadsadeghi et al. [27] for biogas production from softwood pine. The substrate (20 g based on dry weight) was mixed with 160 mL of 75 % ethanol solution (solid to liquid ratio 1:8) in the presence of sulfuric acid (1 % w/w based on the dry weight of substrate) as the catalyst. The suspension was poured into a 500 mL stainless steel reactor (Steel Sanat, Isfahan Iran), and the reactor was placed in an oil bath at 150 °C for 30 min and then placed in an ice bath. The liquid and solid phases were separated using a filter, and the solids were washed with distilled water. After neutralization, the solids and liquids from the pretreatment were dried at 40 °C in an oven, weighed after drying to calculate the pretreatment yield, and stored in sealed plastic bags at room temperature until use.


2.2.3 Dilute acid pretreatment

Dilute sulfuric acid pretreatment was carried out according to the optimum conditions reported by Safari et al. [28] for softwood pine. For this process, 20 g of the substrate based on dry weight was mixed with 200 g of 0.5 % w/w sulfuric acid (solid to liquid ratio 1:10). The mixture was transferred to the 500 mL reactor and the reactor was placed in an oil bath, the bath temperature was set at 140 °C. The pretreatment was performed at this temperature for 5 min, and then the reactor was placed in an ice-water bath. The liquid and solid phases were separated using a filter, and the solids were washed with distilled water to be neutralized. Solids were dried at 40 °C in an oven, were weighed, and stored at room temperature until use.


2.3 Biogas production

Anaerobic digestion of untreated and pretreated substrates, including pretreated solids and liquors, was accomplished according to the method developed by Hansen et al. [29]. For this purpose, 0.25 gVS of each substrate (including untreated sample, pretreated solids, pretreatment liquors), 5 mL distilled water, and 20 mL of inoculum were poured into 118 mL dark vials.

To calculate the biogas produced from substrates, the amount of biogas produced from the inoculum alone was also measured and subtracted from the amount of biogas produced from each sample. Pure cellulose (Avicel, Merck, Germany) was used as a control substrate to ensure inoculum activity. The bottles were then plugged with butyl rubber septums and aluminum caps. Air in the vials was removed by purging with pure N_2 gas for 2 min to provide anaerobic conditions and then incubated at mesophilic conditions (37 °C) for 45 days. The volume of biogas produced during the anaerobic digestion process was measured using the liquid displacement method [30].


2.4 Analytical methods

The amounts of total solids (TS), volatile solids (VS), lignin, and carbohydrates contents in the substrates and inoculum were calculated according to methods developed by the National Renewable Energy library (NREL) [31]–33]. To determine TS and VS contents, untreated and pretreated samples were dried at 105 °C using an oven, weighed, incinerated in a furnace at 575 °C, and weighed again [32].

To determine the lignin content in substrates, 3 mL sulfuric acid (72 % w/w) was added to 0.3 g samples and placed in a water bath, and manually mixed every 5 min at 30 °C for 1 h. The acids were diluted by adding 84 mL of deionized water. The dilute acid hydrolysis was performed at 121° C for 1 h. Then, solids and liquids were separated with filter paper. The liquid phase was injected into a high performance liquid chromatograph (HPLC, Agilent 1260 infinity, USA), equipped with an Aminex column (HPX-87P, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, USA) and refractive index and UV/Vis detectors (Jasco International Co., Tokyo, Japan), to quantify its sugar contents. The solid phase was used to determine the ash content and acid-insoluble lignin, and the liquid phase was used to determine the acid-soluble lignin by means of an optical spectrometer at the wavelength of 240 nm [33].

Prior to the analysis of untreated samples, it is necessary to remove non-structural materials to prevent interference in later stages of analysis. For this purpose, a two-step extraction with Soxhlet was used to remove water-soluble and ethanol-soluble substances [34]. Water-soluble substances may include inorganic substances, non-structural sugars, and nitrogenous substances. Ethanol-soluble substances also include chlorophyll, wax, and other minor components.

Analysis of biogas components (methane and carbon dioxide) was performed by gas chromatography (GC, SP-3420A, TCD detector, Beijing Beifen Ruili Analytical Instrument Co., Beijing, China), equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) operating at 150 °C. The GC was equipped with a packed column (3 m length and 3 mm internal diameter, stainless steel, Porapak Q column, Chrom-pack, Germany). Nitrogen gas was used as the carrier gas with a flow rate of 50 mL/min. The biogas samples were injected into the GC through a pressure lock syringe. Certain volumes of pure methane gas and carbon dioxide gas were injected into the GC to create the calibration curves. According to the calibration curve, the gas compositions were calculated. The volume of produced biogas was measured by the water displacement method [30]. Considering biogas volume and methane content after each measurement within 3–5 days intervals, the methane volume produced during intervals was calculated. The overall methane volume in each batch experiment was calculated by summing up methane volumes from each interval. Methane yields were calculated based on the produced methane volume at normal conditions per g of volatile solids added to the bioreactor at the beginning of each batch.

Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer (TENSOR 27 FT-IR, Bruker, Leipzig, Germany) equipped with a universal ATR (attenuated total reflection) accessory and a DTGS (deuterated triglycine sulfate) detector was used to identify the structural changes in the pretreated substrates.

The morphological structure in the substrate surface was studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). All of the dried samples were coated with gold, and the images were captured by SEM (EvoLs, Zeiss, Germany) at 15 kV.


2.5 Statistical analysis

Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted on experimental results to evaluate the significant differences between the results using Minitab 20.3 software using the Tukey method with a 95 % confidence limit between pretreatments. There are no significant differences between groups with the same letters in each table or figure at a 5 % probability (P-value < 0.05).


2.6 Gasoline equivalent

Gasoline equivalent is a concept that shows the amount of gasoline that contains the energy content of produced biogas. The gasoline equivalents of biogas produced from different substrates using different pretreatments and considering pretreatments material recoveries were calculated to have comparable results [35]. The heating values (at 25 °C) of 36.1 MJ/Nm^3 for biomethane and 32.0 MJ/L for gasoline were considered.


3 Result and discussion

Different parts of spruce wood were pretreated with concentrated phosphoric acid, dilute sulfuric acid, and organosolv. The untreated and pretreated solids as well as treatment liquors were anaerobically digested for biogas production. The total amount of bioenergy produced from each pretreatment was calculated as the gasoline equivalent.


3.1 Substrate characterization

Different characteristics of untreated and pretreated substrates, including TS, VS and lignin content were determined (Table 1 ). The TS and VS contents of untreated substrates were between 92.6 and 96.0 % and 86.2–96.7 %, respectively. The total lignin contents of untreated substrate were in the range of 20.7 and 36.8 %. The spruce fruit (36.8 %) and bark (35.7 %) had the highest lignin contents among the different parts. The lignin content of several types of Norway spruce has been reported as 8.4 ± 2.1 % for leaves [36,37], 29.4 ± 1.8 % for wood [36,38], 22.8 ± 1.7 % for branches [36,39,40], and 11.8 ± 0.9 % for barks [41–43] in the literature. The considerable differences between the lignin content in the present study with the spruce used in other studies. It seems that the hot and dry climate of Isfahan (Iran) resulted in higher lignin content. Besides climatic conditions, it can also be related to the differences in soil properties and variety and more investigation is necessary to find the detected differences.


3.2 Compositional changes

The compositions of different parts of the tree pretreated with phosphoric acid, dilute sulfuric acid, and ethanol were characterized (Table 1). All conducted pretreatments affected the compositions to some extent. Concentrated phosphoric acid pretreatment significantly reduced the lignin content of all substrates within a range of 24–57 %. The highest delignification yield of 57 % was attributed to the phosphoric acid − pretreated wood sample. Similarly, phosphoric acid pretreatment decreased the lignin content of corn stover by 20.8 % in another study [44]. The lignin removal from spruce wood (57 %) in the present study was higher than that of pinewood (25 %), pretreated with concentrated phosphoric acid [45]. The mechanism responsible for decreasing the lignin content in phosphoric acid pretreatment is the partial dissolution of lignin in the second stage of the pretreatment (precipitation of cellulose and hemicellulose by adding acetone) [26].

Organoslov pretreatment, after phosphoric acid pretreatment, had the uppermost effect on lignin removal (10–45 %). In organosolv pretreatment, H_2SO_4 acts as a catalyst and accelerates breaking glycosidic bonds inside hemicellulose structure as well as between lignin and hemicellulose and improves the delignification, which can consequently result in higher biogas yields [46]. The effect of organosolv pretreatment on lignin removal from spruce wood in the present study was more effective than that of softwood pine (1–21 %) under similar conditions, as reported by Mirmohamadsadeghi et al. [45]. Delignification from other lignocelluloses has been reported by organosolv pretreatment; however, their values are not comparable with the current study due to differences in substrates as well as differences in pretreatment conditions. For instance, Mancini et al. [47] reported 14 % lignin removal from wheat straw using organosolv pretreatment with 50 % ethanol at 180 °C for 1 h. Also, a lignin removal of 21 % was reported by Hesami et al. [48] from sunflower stalk using organosolv pretreatment with 50 % isopropanol solution at 160 °C for 30 min and 1 % acidic catalyst.

Sulfuric acid pretreatment showed no considerable lignin removal from pretreated solids, except for fruit (31 % delignification). Dilute acid penetrates the cell wall during the pretreatment and breaks down hydrogen bonds. It also breaks down glycosides to hydrolyze hemicellulose and releases acid-soluble lignin [16]. The percentage of delignification from spruce wood (9.9 %) by sulfuric acid in this study was similar to the amount of lignin removal reported by Safari et al. [28] from pinewood (10.1 %) using dilute acid pretreatment under similar conditions. It is lower than that of wheat straw at 121 °C for 120 min, which was 15 % lignin removal [49].

Glucan content in almost all parts of the spruce tree increased by 4.1–23.9 % after different pretreatments (Fig. S1, Supplementary material). The highest increase (23.9 %) in glucan content was observed in leaves pretreated by organosolv. In this case, glucan content increased from 47.7 % in untreated leaves to 59.1 % in organoslv pretreated leaves. In contrast to glucan content, hemicellulose content showed a decrease by 11.5 up to 98.6 % in all the pretreated substrates.


3.3 Structural changes

To study changes made by the pretreatments in cellulose structure and crystallinity, pretreated and untreated samples from different parts of spruce tree were analyzed by FTIR. The spectra for all substrates are presented in Fig. 1 . Considering the FTIR spectra, the adsorption ratios of A_1430/A_896 and A_1375/A_2900 represents the crystallinity index (CI) and the total crystallinity index (TCI) of lignocellulosic structure, respectively [50]. The results are summarized in Table 2 . The CI values are related to the resistance of the cellulose to biological degradation. In other words, decreasing the CI typically corresponds to speeding up digestion with a higher yield [34]. All the applied pretreatments performed on all spruce parts reduced the CI of cellulose.

In research by Karimi et al. [51], applying sulfuric acid pretreatment at 150 °C for 30 min on kitchen and garden wastes reduced the TCI by 25 %, which was approximately equal to the TCI reduction of spruce leaves (24.5 %) by acid pretreatment in the present study. The TCI of spruce leaves and wood decreased by 13.7 % and 10.2 %, respectively, after organosolv pretreatment in this study, which was higher than that of olive leaves (7.2 % reduction) and olive wood (17.2 % increase) pretreated by organosolv at 180 °C for 1 h with sulfuric acid catalyst [52]. However, the pretreatments did not reduce the crystallinity of cellulose in branches and bark, which could be due to the removal of amorphous cellulose and hemicellulose from the structure. The increase in CI in some samples, such as sulfuric acid-pretreated wood and fruit, can be related to the removal of amorphous cellulose [51]. The maximum decrease in TCI was observed by phosphoric acid pretreatment on the leaves (26.5 %), which indicates the conversion of high crystalline cellulose (I) to less crystalline and amorphous cellulose (II). Organosolv and phosphoric acid pretreatments have removed more lignin (as inferred from the peak at 1598 cm^−1) from the solid structure of the substrates compared to sulfuric acid pretreatment. Organosolv pretreatment has converted type II cellulose (the peak at 1430 cm^−1) to amorphous cellulose (the peak at 896 cm^−1).


3.4 Morphological changes

The purpose of using pretreatments is to modify the compact and inaccessible structure of lignocelluloses and weaken the bonds between lignin, hemicellulose, and cellulose to achieve the highest available internal and external surfaces and reduce the crystallinity of lignocelluloses to improve hydrolysis. These morphological changes in different parts of spruce pretreated with concentrated phosphoric acid, which yielded the highest biogas production, were visualized using SEM images (Fig. 2 ). The SEM images of untreated substrates (Fig. 2, a1-e1) showed a very compact and crystalline structure, which was inaccessible to microorganisms. The pretreatment destroyed the structure and provided a more accessible surface for microorganisms. Concentrated phosphoric acid pretreatment provided more available surfaces by dissolving hemicellulose from the lignocellulose structure. Phosphoric acid pretreatment (Fig. 2 a2 to e2) opened up the structure. It also hydrolyzes and dissolves cellulose and hemicellulose fibrils by breaking down regular hydrogen bonds and reducing the degree of polymerization [16,26].


3.5 Biogas production

Different parts of untreated and pretreated spruce tree were anaerobically digested, and the results are presented in Fig. 3 , Fig. S2, and Fig. S3 (Supplementary material).


3.5.1 Biogas production from spruce leaves

The highest methane yield of 245 NmL CH_4/gVS was obtained from the organosolv liquor of spruce leaves, among all the applied substrates. Whereas the minimum value of methane yield of 17 NmL CH_4/gVS was observed from the phosphoric acid liquor of spruce leaves between all the treatments on spruce leaves. Among the pretreated solids of spruce leaves, phosphoric acid pretreated leaves yielded the highest methane production with the value of 212 NmL CH_4/gVS Salehian et al. [53] reported the highest methane yield of 86.16 NmL CH_4/gVS from pine tree leaves pretreated with NaOH 8 % (w/w) at 100 °C for 10 min. The reported methane yield from NaOH-pretreated pine leaves by Salehian et al. [48] is not only lower than the phosphoric acid- and organosolv-pretreated spruce leaves, but also lower than untreated spruce leaves in the present study. This can be related to the differences in the composition and structure of these two leaves, even though both are needle leaves. Organosolv pretreatment increased the methane yield from leaves by 21 %, compared to that of untreated ones. In contrast to the present study, Najafi et al. [52] reported that organosolv pretreatment at 180 °C for 1 h reduced the methane yield from olive leaves by 16 % (149.78 NmL/gVS). This contrast could be explained by the differences between broad (olive) and needle (spruce) leaves structure as well as the pretreatment conditions.

The highest methane content in the produced biogas from leaves was 75 % for solids and 65 % for liquors, both obtained from dilute acid pretreatment. However, the lowest methane content (30 %) was obtained from concentrated phosphoric acid pretreatment liquor. The lack of correlation between methane percent and methane production volume can be explained by the complicated biogas production bioreaction in four anaerobic digestion stages, i.e., hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis, and methanogenesis. Disturbing any of the four stage yields a low methane volume, while the methane percentage can be high. In contrast, disturbing the fourth stage, i.e., methanogenesis, can yield high biogas volume, which is mainly comprised of CO_2, with low methane percentage and low methane volume. The bacteria in the last stage are generally more sensitive to substrates and environmental conditions and their growth rate is much slower than the bacteria involved in other stages [6]. Therefore, the high methane percentage as well as low methane volume obtained from sulfuric acid can be related to the problems that occurred in the microbial consortium. Since concentrations of substrate inhibitors, including furfural and hydroxymethylfurfural, were much lower than the threshold of anaerobic digestion, i.e., 1 g/l furfural and 0.2 g/l hydroxymethyl furfural [54], it might be related to disturbing the microbial community. Thus, more investigations, including the analysis of microbial community, are necessary to find the main reason.


3.5.2 Biogas production from spruce wood

As shown in Fig. 3, performing phosphoric acid pretreatment prior to anaerobic digestion resulted in the highest biomethane yield of 160 NmL CH_4/gVS from spruce wood, which corresponded to 160 % increase over the untreated wood. The produced methane obtained from the liquors of organosolv and sulfuric acid pretreatments was 184 NmL CH_4/gVS and 138 NmL CH4/gVS respectively. Dilute acid and organosolv pretreatments had negative effects on methane production and decreased the amount of methane production compared to the untreated wood. Methane production yield from organosolv pretreated spruce wood (65.7 NmL CH_4/gVS) was close to the results reported from pine wood pretreated with organosolv (71.4 NmL CH_4/gVS) [27]. In contrast, methane yield from organosolv pretreated spruce wood was 50 % less than that of olive wood pretreated at 180 °C for 1 h [52]. The difference can be related to the differences in the structure of olive wood (which is a hardwood) and spruce wood as well as the differences in pretreatment time. In another study, Shafiei et al. [55] used one of the best cellulose solvents, i.e., N-Methyl morpholine-N-oxide (NMMO), and pretreated pinewood at 120 °C for 15 h and obtained a biomethane yield of 220 NmL/gVS However, their techno-economic analysis showed that using the solvent is economically feasible only when over 99 % of the solvent can be recovered, while it is practically impossible.


3.5.3 Biogas production from spruce branches

The highest methane yield from the spruce branch was 150 and 135 NmL CH_4/gVS which was obtained by concentrated phosphoric acid and organosolv pretreatment, respectively. This maximum methane yield was 96 % higher than that of the untreated sample (90 NmL CH_4/gVS). Salehian et al. [53] obtained 68 NmL CH_4/gVS from pine tree branches after alkaline pretreatment with 8 % w/w NaOH at 100 °C for 10 min with no significant increase compared to the untreated substrate. Comparing the results of the present study with those of Salehian et al. [53] showed the success of phosphoric acid and organosolv pretreatment in comparison with alkaline pretreatment in improving methane production. Chandra et al. [56] reported that alkaline pretreatment of rice stalks improved the methane yield up to 165.9 mL/gVS respectively. It seems that alkali pretreatment is more effective on agricultural residues than wood wastes.


3.5.4 Biogas production from spruce bark

The concentrated phosphoric acid pretreatment caused the highest methane yield of 146 NmL CH_4/gVS from spruce bark, which showed 2.4-fold improvement compared to that from untreated bark. The methane yield from untreated spruce bark (43.1 NmL/gVS) was higher than that of the untreated pine bark (33 NmL/gVS). as reported by Salehian et al. [53]. Dilute sulfuric acid had no significant effect on the methane yield of pretreated spruce bark. A slight increase in methane yield (53 NmL CH_4/gVS) was obtained by organosolv pretreatment on bark solids fraction. However, this amount is less than that of the untreated and organosolv-pretreated sunflower stalk at 140 °C for 30 min by Hesami et al. [48], due to the more recalcitrance structure of spruce bark than sunflower stalk.


3.5.5 Biogas production from spruce fruit

Unlike other parts of spruce, dilute acid pretreatment considerably improved methane yield from spruce fruit. On the other hand, its pretreatment liquor yielded the highest methane yield (208 NmL CH_4/gVS), among all the pretreated fruits. After that, concentrated phosphoric acid pretreated solids of the fruit had the highest methane yield (141 NmL of CH_4/gVS), which was 85 % higher than that of the untreated sample. Nieves et al. [57] achieved 40 % increase in the methane yield by applying 85.7 wt% phosphoric acids at 50 °C for 30 min on oil palm empty fruit bunches. Organosolv pretreatment also increased methane production up to 80 NmL CH_4/gVS in solids and up to 60 NmL CH_4/gVS in liquids. Similarly, Salehian et al. [53] reported 80 NmL CH_4/gVS from pine fruit using alkaline pretreatment at 100 °C for 10 min, and the untreated pine fruit yielded 30 NmL CH_4/gVS Thus, alkaline pretreatment is more effective in improving methane yield from pine fruit [53] than dilute acid pretreatment on spruce fruit and it is similar to that of phosphoric acid pretreatment on spruce fruit observed in the present study.


3.5.6 Biogas production from the mixture of spruce parts

As indicated in Fig. 3, there was no significant improvement in the methane yield from the pretreated spruce mixture in all cases, except phosphoric acid pretreatment with the maximum yield of (225 NmL/gVS). Mirahmadi et al. [58] obtained 50 mL CH_4/gVS from spruce waste mixture after alkaline pretreatment through thermophilic anaerobic digestion. In this study, all three pretreatments yielded higher methane yields than those reported by Mirahmadi et al. [58]. The low amount of methane produced from solids after diluting acid and organosolv pretreatments could be due to the resistance of cellulose to hydrolysis. Table 1 shows the high lignin contents in the solid fractions from acid pretreatment, which is directly related to the low methane yields since lignin has severe negative effects in anaerobic digestion [59]. On the other hand, sulfur, which can be trapped in the structure of the sulfuric acid pretreated solids, can inhibit methanogens by making competition with sulfur-reducing microorganisms [6]. Also, this pretreatment was not recommended for biogas production in solid-state fermentation [60]. However, sulfuric acid pretreatment is suitable for biohydrogen production, which does not involve the methanogenesis stage. On the other hand, the release of sugars into the liquid phase during sulfuric acid pretreatment has increased methane yield from the liquid phase (pretreatment liquor). The liquors from sulfuric acid and organosolv pretreatments, compared to phosphoric acid pretreatment, are richer in monomeric sugars due to hemicellulose degradation and its dissolution in the liquid phase. This leads to more methane production [6,35] and is observed in most cases. The acetone washing stage in phosphoric acid pretreatment dissolves cellulose and precipitates hemicellulose, while partially dissolves lignin to the liquid phase. In addition, the low amount of methane from phosphoric acid pretreatment liquor could be due to the inhibitory effect of sodium ions, which were added to the liquor in large quantities to neutralize the pH. (Fig. 3). The highest methane contents (67–82 %) were obtained using sulfuric acid pretreated solids in all samples, and the lowest methane contents were mostly obtained from the liquors of concentrated phosphoric acid pretreatment (Fig. 3).

For a better comparison between the pretreatment, the amounts of methane produced from the solids and liquids obtained from the pretreatments were taken together and are reported in Fig. 4 . The calculations were based on biomethane production from 1 kg of each substrate and solid recoveries of substrates after pretreatments were also considered. The highest amount of methane yield (total methane from both solid and liquor of pretreatment) was obtained from dilute sulfuric acid and/or organosolv pretreatments for all parts of the spruce tree, except for the mixture. The highest amounts of methane produced from dilute acid pretreatment were 242 and 220 L/kg of spruce leaves and fruits, respectively, and that from the organosolv pretreatment was 253 L/kg of spruce fruits.


3.6 Total energy production

To evaluate the most efficient type of pretreatment for bioenergy production from different parts of spruce tree, the total energy outputs of substrates were compared in the form of gasoline-equivalent (Table 3 ). Biomethane production from both solid and pretreatment liquor as well as solid recovery was considered. Organosolov pretreatment produced the highest energy output of 285 L gasoline equivalent from each Kg of spruce leaves. In addition, dilute acid pretreatment improved fruit and leaves conversion up to 273 and 249 L of gasoline per Kg of the substrates, respectively. The values obtained from the olive leaves by organoslov pretreatment with an acid catalyst and without acid catalyst by Najafi et al. [52] were about 80 and 78 L, respectively, which is considerably less than the values obtained in the present research. Untreated spruce leaves (produced 122 L gasoline equivalent /kg) was the most efficient substrates for anaerobic digestion among the untreated substrates. Untreated spruce leaves were more suitable feedstock for biogas production compared with olive tree leaves [52] and less suitable compared with pine needle leaves [61].

Besides considering the total energy production, environmental and techno-economical studies are needed to evaluate the improvement obtained for biogas production from different parts of spruce tree from the environmental and economic points of view, respectively.


4 Conclusions

Pretreatment is a critical stage to improve biogas production from different parts of spruce trees since it can have a positive or negative effect on methane yields depending on the substrate. Concentrated phosphoric acid pretreatment considerably increased the biomethane production from fruit's solid fractions of pretreatments (up to 5.44-fold). On the other hand, dilute sulfuric acid pretreatment yielded the highest biogas production from the pretreatment liquors in most cases. However, dilute acid pretreatment mostly had negative effects on methane production from solid fractions of the pretreatment compared to the untreated substrates. The highest methane yield from the mixture of spruce parts (225.5 NmL/gVS) was yielded from the solid fraction of concentrated phosphoric acid pretreatment. Among pretreatment liquors, organosolv pretreatment of leaves yielded the highest methane production (245.3 NmL/g VS) from liquor. Overall, organosolv pretreatment of leaves led to the highest methane yield (252.9 NmL/gVS) considering both the liquid and solid fractions. Concentrated phosphoric acid and organosolv pretreatments removed lignin and made higher accessibilities to cellulose and hemicellulose. According to the FTIR analysis, the pretreatments reduced cellulose crystallinity in most pretreated solids.


 CRediT authorship contribution statement

Neda Rasaeian: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft. Safoora Mirmohamadsadeghi: Supervision, Validation, Methodology, Writing – review & editing. Joeri F.M. Denayer: Supervision, Validation, Writing – review & editing. Keikhosro Karimi: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Project administration, Supervision, Validation, Writing – review & editing.


Appendix A Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2022.125539.


Appendix A Supplementary data

The following are the Supplementary data to this article: