TITLE: Improvement of biogas production from pine wood by alkali pretreatment


1 Introduction

Lignocellulosic materials, e.g. wood and agricultural crops, are the most plentiful renewable resources in the world. Wood wastes are cost-competitive and environmentally friendly biomass resource. In general, less than 50% of a tree is converted to the end products and the rest remains as unused resources [1], which are usually sent to landfills or burned [2,3]. However, they can be converted to valuable products by different processes such as anaerobic digestion which produce biogas.

Pine wood residues are one of the widely produced lignocellulosic sources and can be considered as a potential source of biogas. However, the biodegradation of softwoods are difficult because of their highly recalcitrant structures.

The fiber structure and consequently wood properties are determined based on their constituting components, i.e. cellulose, hemicelluloses and lignin. The high crystalline cellulosic structure which is shielded with lignin and hemicelluloses make them difficult for efficient conversion to biogas by anaerobic bacteria. A suggested solution to this problem is to introduce a pretreatment prior to the biogas production, in order to increase the digestibility of the lignocellulosic materials. The final goal of the pretreatment is to decrease the crystallinity of cellulose and eliminate the resistance of lignin; hence, making them more accessible to the bacteria [4].

Several pretreatment methods have been suggested to improve the biogas production including physical, physicochemical, chemical, and biological pretreatments [4]. Among the physical pretreatments, milling was shown to improve enzymatic hydrolysis by increasing the surface area of lignocellulosic materials [5]. This is a typical process before most of any other pretreatment.

It has been frequently shown that smaller particles of lignocelluloses have better yield of biofuel [6–8]. Zhang and Zhang [9] studied the improvement of biogas production from rice straw and showed that the highest yield of biogas could be obtained by a combination of grinding and alkali treatment.

Alkali pretreatment with sodium hydroxide is one of the chemical pretreatments that have been applied for the lignocelluloses. In particular, the treatment at high concentration of NaOH (at 6–8%) can dissolve the lignin and/or cellulose (depending on temperature) of lignocelluloses [10] and efficiently improve the structure of these materials [11].

This method was investigated on different lignocellulosic materials like rice straw, cattle manure with corn stover, hardwoods, softwoods, and pulp and paper sludge [11–14] to improve the biogas production. However, it is shown that various process conditions, i.e. temperature, concentration, and the retention time, can lead to different results.

Only a few studies have investigated the effect of alkali pretreatment on improvement of biogas production from wood. Recently, Mirahmadi et al. [11] have examined the effect of NaOH pretreatment on the softwood spruce and hardwood birch to improve the yield of biogas and biethanol. They showed that the alkali pretreatment have different effects on the soft- and hardwood at different temperatures. Nieves et al. [15] also studied the NaOH pretreatment on the non-wooden lignocellulosic material, OPEFB (oil palm empty fruit bunch), at 100 °C for various periods of time and observed the same effects. To the best of our knowledge, there is no previous study on enhancing the biogas production from pine wood.

In the present work, the effects of NaOH pretreatment of pine wood, at high and low temperatures and different retention times, on the yield of methane production are studied. Furthermore, structural changes in the pine wood as a result of the treatments are investigated.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Raw materials

A 10 years old pine wood was obtained from a forest around city of Isfahan (Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran) (3234_0N, 5132_0E), and dried at 45 °C. They were debarked, cut, and grinded. The chips were screened to achieve a relatively homogeneous size of less than 1 mm (20 mesh). The dry weight content of the selected samples was measured by drying at 105 °C.


2.2 Pretreatment procedure

An amount of 5 g milled pine wood and 95 g NaOH solution (8% w/w) was mixed for 10 min at room temperature. The mixture was then incubated either at 0 or 100 °C for different periods of time (i.e. 10, 30, or 60 min) and mixed every 10 min during the incubation period. The mixtures were then centrifuged at 4500 rpm (5000 g) at room temperature for 10 min and the settled solid was washed with distilled water followed by vacuum filtration until pH 7 was achieved. The solids were kept in plastic bags at 4 °C until use.


2.3 Production of biogas

Anaerobic batch digestions of the treated and untreated pine woods were carried out at mesophilic conditions (37 °C) according to the method described by Hansen et al. [16]. The inoculum was obtained from a large scale biogas bioreactor (Isfahan municipal wastewater treatment, Isfahan, Iran), operating at mesophilic conditions (37 °C). The batch digesters were 118 mL serum glass bottles, closed with butyl rubber seals and aluminium caps. In each flask, 20 mL of inoculum was added to a certain amount of substrate to keep a VS (volatile solid) ratio of 2:1 (inoculum: substrate). Deionized water was then added to have a final volume of 25 mL. Moreover, inoculum and deionized water were applied as a blank, to be able to determine the gas production of the inoculum alone. Anaerobic conditions were provided by purging the flasks with a gas containing 80% N_2 and 20% CO_2 for about 2 min. The bioreactors were maintained at 37 °C in an oven and manually shacked every day. Gas samples were taken every 3 days during the first 15 days and then every 5 days until 45 days and analyzed for methane and carbon dioxide contents using gas chromatography. All the digesting experiments were carried out in triplicates.


2.4 Analytical methods

The composition of gas produced in anaerobic digestion was analyzed by a gas chromatograph (Sp-3420A, TCD detector, Beijing Beifen Ruili Analytical Instrument CO), which was equipped with a packed column (Porapack Q column, Chrompack). Helium was used as a carrier with 20 mL/min flow rate. Temperature of the column, injector, and detector were 5, 90 and 140 °C, respectively. The injections were carried out using a pressure-tight syringe (VICI, Precision Sampling Inc.) making it possible to take gas samples at the actual pressure of the bioreactors. The sample volume was 250 μL. Pure methane was used as a standard gas and all the results of methane volumes are presented at standard conditions.

The treated and untreated pine woods were analyzed for ash, total solids, volatile solids, carbohydrates, and lignin contents according to the standard method presented by Sluiter et al. [17].

High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) was used to quantify sugars. It was equipped with a UV/vis and RI detectors (Jasco International Co., Tokyo, Japan) and an ion-exchange column (Aminex HPX-87P, Bio-Rad), using deionized water as an eluent with a flow rate of 0.6 mL/min at 85 °C.

Structural change of the treated and untreated wood was examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The dry samples were mounted on double-sided tape placed on aluminium stubs. The samples were coated with gold (BAL-TEC SCD 005) and analyzed by a scanning electron microscope (PHILIPS, XL30) with an accelerating voltage of 15 kV. The crystallinity and structural features of the NaOH-treated and untreated wood species were examined using a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer (Bruker Tensor 27 FT-IR) equipped with a universal ATR (Attenuated Total Reflection) accessory and DTGS detector. Its spectra were obtained with an average of 64 scans and a resolution of 2 cm^−1, in the range of 600–4000 cm^−1.


3 Results


3.1 Effects of pretreatment on the pine composition and structure

The composition of the pine wood before and after pretreatment with NaOH was analyzed and their carbohydrates and lignin contents are shown in Table 1 . The untreated sample included 34.4% lignin and 62.2% carbohydrates in which the major portion (38.8%) of the carbohydrates was glucan. Alkali treatment for 10 min at high temperature significantly affected the amount of lignin and carbohydrates contents by removal of the acid insoluble lignin (AIL) and increasing the glucan content. The results also showed that the shorter time of treatment at high temperature, the greater effect of the treatment. For example, by increasing the retention time from 10 min to 60 min at 100 °C, the glucan content was decreased from 46.8% to 40.5% and the AIL was increased from 23.6% to 30.5%. However, it was contrariwise in the treatment at 0 °C, where increasing the retention time from 10 to 60 min resulted in increasing the glucan content from 39.2% to 42.1% and decreasing the AIL from 27.9% to 24.4%. In other words, treatment at low temperature had a greater impact in longer retention times (Table 1). It is worth mentioning, the designing of the experiments was according to some preliminary tests, in which pretreatment, at low temperature, in about 5 min did not result in significant changes in biogas yield. Therefore, the range of time was selected between 10 and 60 min for both of the temperatures.

Table 2 shows the percentage of volatile solid (VS) in total solid (TS) of the untreated and treated pine woods. The VS of untreated sample was 86% which was increased by the pretreatment. The results of Table 2 also show that prolongation of the pretreatment increased the VS content, indicating the higher biodegradable material content in the treated materials.

The effects of alkali pretreatment on the structure of the wood were also investigated by FTIR analysis. This analysis has been widely used for obtaining information about the structure of wood constituents and chemical changes taking place in wood due to various treatments [18]. Table 3 and Fig. 1 represent FTIR analysis results for the untreated pine wood and the wood treated for 10 min at 100 °C and for 60 min at 0 °C.

Crystallinity index was considered as (A_1430/A_898), in which 1430 and 898 cm^−1 bands denote cellulose I and cellulose II, respectively [19]. Crystallinity index was 0.871 for the untreated sample and it was reduced to 0.655 and 0.622 when treatment was performed at high and low temperatures, respectively. Total crystallinity index which is regarded as (A_1375/A_2900) was 1.716, 1.46 and 1.529 for the untreated and high and low temperatures treated woods, respectively. The amount of lignin in treated wood was less than that in untreated one as well.

SEM images of the untreated and treated pine woods were used to investigating the possible structural modification caused by the pretreatment. Fig. 2 illustrates the SEM images of the untreated wood, the treated wood at 100 °C for 10 min, and also the treated wood at 0 °C for 60 min. It can be inferred from this figure that high temperature pretreatment had degrading effects while low temperature pretreatment caused structural swelling.


3.2 Biogas production

Figs. 3 and 4 represent the methane yield of untreated and treated woods at high and low temperature, respectively, at initial, middle and final stages of 45 days anaerobic digestion.

The results show that while pretreatments had no significant effect on the methane yield at the beginning of digestion, it could improve the gas production by prolongation of the digestion. An amount of 65 mL/g VS methane was produced from untreated sample after 45 days, while the wood treated for 10 min at 100 °C yielded 178.2 mL/g VS. This implied 181% improvement in the methane yield respect to the untreated wood. As shown in Fig. 3, the alkali pretreatment at 100 °C could improve the biogas production. However, prolongation of pretreatment decreased its efficiency (Fig. 3), while in pretreatment at 0 °C, increasing the retention time had positive impact on improvement of the biogas yield (Fig. 4).


4 Discussion

Pine wood has superior technological properties and high usage potential; therefore, a large amount of pine wood residuals is produced every year which can be used as a substrate for biofuel production. However, the softwood trees, sometimes called evergreens, grow slower than hardwood but have longer fibers [20]. Because of their longer fiber, they have a compact structure that strongly resist on the pretreatment and biodegradation. On the other hand, the type of lignin in the softwood makes the fibers more resistance to microbial hydrolysis. In the present study, sodium hydroxide pretreatment was investigated to make the pine wood a suitable substrate for biogas production.

It was observed that the effectiveness of the sodium hydroxide pretreatment on the biogas production from pine wood was different at high and low temperatures and retention time.

SEM images showed that the pretreatment at high temperature resulted in disintegration of the biomass structure (Fig. 2), while the pretreatment at low temperature resulted in reduction of cellulose crystallinity, as represented in morphological modification analyzed by FTIR (Table 3). It has been shown that the ability of NaOH to change the cellulose crystallinity at lower temperatures (e.g. 0 °C) is more than that at higher temperatures (e.g. 100 °C). It may be explained by stronger binding of Na^+ and OH^- to water at lower temperatures, enabling the NaOH solution to break the hydrogen bonds within the cellulosic structure and convert cellulose I to cellulose II [21–24].

The alkaline treatment is one of the most effective method in breaking the ester bonds between lignin, hemicellulose and cellulose, without fragmentation of the hemicellulose polymers [25]. However, that is rather different at high temperature treatment which is shown as reduction of xylan and mannan contents. In other words, the main mechanism of NaOH pretreatment at high temperature is to breakdown the ester bonds cross-linking between hemicelluloses, cellulose, and lignin of biomass. Thus, by lignin modification or removal, the porosity of biomass will increase. However, the prolongation of this process can result in decomposition of dissolved polysaccharides and formation of alkali-stable end-groups (peeling off reactions) which negatively affect its bioconversion yield [26].

A negative correlation was observed between the lignin content of the substrate and the amount of produced methane gas. In other words, the treatment reaction degraded ester bonds of lignin–carbohydrate complexes, leaving more cellulose free for digestion [27]. The linkages of interunits and the functional groups of lignin, cellulose, and hemicellulose were either broken down or destroyed by NaOH that leads to significant changes of the chemical structures. The changes in chemical compositions, chemical structures, and physical characteristics of the pine wood could make the carbohydrates more accessible for the anaerobic bacteria, and consequently resulted in enhancement of the biogas yield [14,10].

Substantial influences of all of the pretreatments on the yield of methane were clearly observed. The best improvement was achieved at 100 °C, in which the pretreatment with 8% NaOH was performed for 10 min, resulting in 181.2% improvement in the yield of methane production. In addition, compared to that of the untreated wood, the methane yield raised to 118.6% by treating for 60 min at 0 °C.


5 Conclusions

The present study showed that the alkali pretreatment of pine wood can significantly improve its biogas yield. The pretreatment resulted in significant reduction in the crystallinity of cellulose and lignin removal, which might be responsible for improved biogas production. However, the efficiency of the treatment highly depends on the time and temperature of the pretreatment. The highest methane yield was achieved after alkali pretreatment with 8% (w/w) NaOH for 10 min at 100 °C.