TITLE: Assess a new strategy and develop a new mixer to improve anaerobic microbial activities and clean biogas production


1 Introduction

Iran has rich and diversified sources of renewable energy namely biomass, solar, wind, and geothermal. Over the past ten years, a few researches have been done in Iran for development and the establishment of small and medium scales of electricity generation plants, powered via biogas energy (Mahmoodi-Eshkaftaki et al., 2016). The most important challenge in this field is developing digesters to increase CH_4 production and enrich biogas production. Some of the most important factors for this goal are suitable mixing system, effective pretreatment, and substrate mixtures (Abdel-Hadi and Abd El-Azeem, 2008). Therefore, the interaction of this parameters will be considered in this research to attach the best conditions.

The mixing of the substrates in the digesters is a vital developing process in biogas production (Abdel-Hadi and Abd El-Azeem, 2008). The purpose of mixing is to distribute the nutrients in the digester uniformly (Zabaleta and Rodic, 2015), to shape a suspension of liquid and solid parts (Naegele et al., 2014), to avoid sedimentation of particles (Naegele et al., 2014), to ensure uniform heat distribution (Hosseini and Abdul Wahid, 2014), to prevent foam formation and enable gas lift from the fermentation substrate (Hosseini and Abdul Wahid, 2014). The quality of mixing in a biogas plant directly effect of mixer type which will be considered in this research. The other important factor for improving the CH_4 production is the waste combination for co-digestion of products based on the availability of substrates through different seasons. It is very important to view that the changes in the characteristics of the waste to be minimum in order to avoid the disturbances in the reactor. In most of the cases, cow manure was co-digested with organic fraction of municipal waste (Kaparaju and Rintala, 2008; Rao and Baral, 2011) and kitchen waste (Zhou et al., 2016). According to researches, it has been observed for the experiments that usually the proportions of the mixture components are randomly selected, while the optimum mixtures have many significant effects on biogas production (Rao and Baral, 2011). Accordingly, the optimization methods were found in the researches trying to achieve optimum blends (Alatriste-Mondragon et al., 2006) which were done as lab-scale. Another important parameter which can increase the biogas and CH_4 production is stabilizing the substrates by chemical pretreatments. They can effectively accelerate sludge solubilization and subsequently improves the overall anaerobic digestion (Chou et al., 2010). Therefore in this research, the optimum mixture and pretreatment will be determined as lab-scale and then they will be realized in a semi-industrial biogas plant.

Different optimization methods can be used in order to obtain the best process for controlling the effective parameters on biogas production such as (i) neural networks to improve the biogas production of the digesters (Thorin et al., 2012), (ii) response surface methodologies, simplex-centroid mixture design and central composite design to optimize the composition of substrates with higher CH_4 potential (Wang et al., 2012), and (iii) linear and nonlinear optimization to obtain the optimum blend of co-substrates that maximizes the CH_4 production (Dahunsi et al., 2017).

The characterizations of developing the mixers and optimizing the substrate blends and pretreatments can increase the biogas and CH_4 production by improving the microbial biomass and microbial growth. Many researches have been related to the microbiology of the anaerobic digestion systems to correlate biogas production with microbial diversity (Dearman et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2011; Yu et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2016). However, there is little scientific literature available in the field of optimizing the co-digestion conditions and pretreatment on biogas compounds (CH_4, H_2S, CO, and O_2) and anaerobic microbial communities, especially realization in semi-industrial biogas plants.

Therefore, the aims of the present study are to (i) determine the optimum mixture of three substrates interact with the best amount of NaOH and H_2O_2 based on the most CH_4 production using a combined D-optimal experimental design in laboratory, (ii) realize the laboratory optimization results in semi-industrial biogas plant and compare the biogas compounds and anaerobic microbial communities between optimum condition (OC) and un-optimum condition (UC) with two different mixer types.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Assess optimal pretreatment and co-digestion strategy as lab-scale

To determine the best pretreatment and co-digestion strategy, the substrates were firstly co-digested with different NaOH and H_2O_2 amounts in a laboratory using small airtight glass reactors based on the combined D-optimal experimental design described in sections 2.1.1 and 2.1.2. The performance of digestion was controlled by measuring the physical and chemical properties of prepared substrates before and after of digestion as reported in section 2.1.3. The best strategy producing the most CH_4 was used for the mixture and pretreatment the substrates in a semi-industrial biogas plant mixed by the Pneu-mechanical and mechanical mixers described in section 2.2. Finally, the biogas compounds and anaerobic microbial communities in the different conditions were measured according to the methods reported in section 2.1.3 and 2.3, respectively.


2.1.1 Preparation of substrates

Municipal waste was obtained as liquid from Water and Wastewater Authority in the secondary stage of purification. Its concentration was 1024 kg/m^3 measured by the method reported in the literature (Chynoweth et al., 2001). Cow manure was obtained from the research farm of Shahrekord University, Iran. Kitchen waste was cut into particulates by a cutter and grinded into small fine particles (lower than 4 mm) by a home type coffee grinder. The cow manure and grinded kitchen waste were diluted with tap water until their concentrations reached near the municipal waste concentration (Wang et al., 2012; Mahmoodi-Eshkaftaki et al., 2016).

The diluted substrates were first made anaerobic in the three particular vessels (1.8 L) using N_2 99%. To this goal, N_2 was injected into the vessels up to 5 min and the substrates lasted 5 days. Then, the prepared substrates (hereafter slurry) were co-digested in the airtight glass reactors (250 mL) with butyl rubber stoppers as a combined D-optimal experimental design. Furthermore, the reactors were pretreated with different amounts of NaOH and H_2O_2. Trials were carried out under mesophilic conditions (35 ± 1 °C) within a water bath, for a period of 40 days, and the CH_4 content of the biogas production was measured for each reactor.


2.1.2 Combined D-optimal experimental design

In order to optimize the concentration of the substrates interaction with chemical pretreatment factors, a combined D-optimal design was used. It will choose points according to a mathematical algorithm using effective parameters (DuMouchel and Jones, 1994). It was done in this research with both mixture components and chemical pretreatment factors. The mixture components were created of the diluted cow manure (A), municipal waste (B), and diluted kitchen waste (C) in ranges of 0–200 g chemically pretreated with NaOH (D) and H_2O_2 (E) in ranges of 0–4% of total weight.

To choose the actual design points for mixture determination, three factorial points, three centers of edges (points midway between adjacent factorial points), three axial check blends, three interior points (average of centers of edges with the overall centroid and also average of constraint plane centroid with the overall centroid), and one overall centroid were used. For pretreatment factor determination, four factorial points, four centers of edges, four axial check blends, four interior points, and one overall centroid were used. Totally, 36 points were determined to make a model for estimating the CH_4, five points to estimate the lack of fit (LF) and five points to replicate the experiment (Goos and Donev, 2005). In modeling, some basic forms of the predictive polynomial equations were used to estimate the dependent variable (y(x)) according to the independent variables (x _i) which have been illustrated in Eqs. (1)−(5) (DuMouchel and Jones, 1994). FORMULA: Mean: y ( x ) = μ + ∑ i = 0 N x i , i = 1,2 , ... , N Assumes that all the treatments have the same mean ( μ ) FORMULA: Linear : y ( x ) = a 0 + ∑ i = 0 N a i x i , i = 1,2 , ... , N FORMULA: Quadratic y ( x ) = a 0 + ∑ i = 0 N a i x i + ∑ ∑ i < j N a i j x i x j , i = 1,2 , ... , N FORMULA: Specific cubic : y ( x ) = a 0 + ∑ i = 0 N a i x i + ∑ ∑ i < j N a i j x i x j + ∑ ∑ i < j < k N ∑ a i j k x i x j x k , i = 1,2 , ... , N FORMULA: Full cubic: y ( x ) = a 0 + ∑ i = 0 N a i x i + ∑ ∑ i < j N a i j x i x j + ∑ ∑ i < j N a ′ i j x i x j ( x i − x j ) + ∑ ∑ i < j < k N ∑ a i j k x i x j x k , i = 1,2 , ... , N

In these basic equations, y was transformation cases of the CH_4 production, x _i showed the amount of the mixture components and chemical pretreatment factors, a _i was model coefficients, and N was the number of mixture components and pretreatment factors (N = 5) described in Table 1 (Kaparaju and Rintala, 2008). In this research, the x _1‒x _5 of the basic equations were replaced with letters of A‒E (the mixture components and chemical pretreatment factors). Usually, the basic shape of equations are presented based on the independent variable of x and then changed as the researchers want (DuMouchel and Jones, 1994).


2.1.3 Analytical methods

Total solids (TS), total volatile solids (TVS), acidity (pH), and electrical conductivity (EC) were analyzed in accordance with Standard Methods for the examination of water and wastewater (Method 1684 and CEN/TS 15148). Total carbon (TC) and total phosphorus (TP) were measured using titration method (Rongping et al., 2010). Sulfate (SO _4 ^2−), total nitrogen (TN), and total potassium (TK) were measured by Spectrophotometer, Kjeldahl apparatus, and Flame photometer, respectively. The biogas compounds including CH_4, H_2S, CO, and O_2 were determined according to ppm ( 1 ppm = 1 mg L = 1 % VOL 10000 ) and % VOL using a multi-function gas detector brand GMI Ltd model GT43 in temperature limit -20–50 °C and 0–95% relative humidity (Ishkov et al., 2011).


2.2 Biogas plant

The biogas plant built at the Biomass Research Centre of the Shahrekord University (Fig. 1 ) consisted of two digester units. Ones for anaerobic digestion by mixing the slurry with a mechanical mixer (MM) (this digester named as mechanical digester), and the other by mixing the slurry with a Pneu-mechanical mixer (PMM) (this digester named as Pneu-mechanical digester). The digesters had the volume of 220 L, the thick of 0.01 m, the diameter of 0.57 m, and the height of 0.9 m. The MM was made from 4-blade marine impeller fixed on a solid shaft and the PMM was made from 4-blade marine impeller welding on it two symmetric sparger nozzles, totally fixed on a hollow shaft.

As it is shown in Fig. 1a, the biogas plant has been composed of a framework, some pressure indicators, a flexible tube (for primary storage the biogas), volumetric gas flow meter, two self-control heaters, some belts and pulleys, the PMM (Fig. 1b), the MM, and an electric motor for rotating the mixers. The Pneu-mechanical digester has a biogas compression system equipped with a compressor, a biogas storage tank, an electric pressure switch for controlling the tank pressure, and a rotary joint for connecting the high-pressure biogas pipe coming from the tank to the hollow mixer shaft (Fig. 1c). The compressed biogas was injected into the Pneu-mechanical digester from below it, through the hollow mixer shaft and the sparger nozzles (Fig. 1b). The injected biogas was distributed non-uniformly throughout the digester by the rotational force of the mixer impeller. The process of compressing biogas and injecting into the Pneu-mechanical digester was done after 10 days of digestion, every 5 h, including with impeller rotation. In the previous days, the slurries were mixed just mechanically because the produced biogas was not enrich enough.


2.3 Determine anaerobic microbial community

The slurry was sampled for every five days during the co-digestion, and total anaerobic bacteria were counted. They were counted by incubating for 48 h at 37 °C in an anaerobic jar under 85% N_2, 10% H_2, and 5% CO_2. The media for total anaerobic bacteria were anaerobe basal agar (CM972; Oxoid, Ltd, Basingstoke, Hampshire, UK) with 10% sterile defibrinated horse blood (Dohrmann et al., 2011; Yu et al., 2014). The method to count total anaerobic bacteria was the pour-plate method which has been fully explained in Dohrmann et al. (2011) researches.


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Characterization of the substrates

Mean amounts of the physical and chemical properties of the prepared substrates before and after digestion have been reported in Table 2 . The results showed that TS and TVS of the diluted kitchen waste were lower than the other substrates because the diluted kitchen waste contained food, fruits, and vegetables with high moisture contents. These findings agreed with other researches (Chen et al., 2010). It was shown that the amount of TS and TVS of the substrates after co-digestion decreased by 49 and 87%, respectively which was similar to other researches (Chen et al., 2010). They reported that between 58 and 99% of the TVS of a slurry was degraded to CH_4 and CO_2 under most feed concentrations. The slurries having NaOH were found to be having sufficient alkalinity to maintain the pH at the starting of the digestion. The pH of all the airtight glass reactors varied in the range of 6.8–8.5 before digestion. It is reported in Table 2 that amounts of the TK in the prepared substrates were little and would not have a negative effect on biogas production (Mahmoodi-Eshkaftaki et al., 2016). Furthermore, the amounts of TP, TN, TC, pH, TS, and TVS were in suitable ranges for biogas production according to the literature. As reported for good biogas production, the suitable amounts of TP, TK, TC/TN, and pH are about 7–38 mg/L, bellow 6000 mg/L, 10–50, and 5.5–8.5, respectively (Kaparaju and Rintala, 2008; Kumar, 2012; Wang et al., 2012; Boonsawang et al., 2014).


3.2 Optimal pretreatment and co-digestion strategy

The response data (the CH_4 estimation) according to the independent variables was obtained using the experiments conducted with different mixtures and chemical pretreatment factors. All the independent and response variables were fitted with the mean, linear, quadratic, special cubic, and full cubic models. Different functions by varying transformation y as square root, natural log, base 10 log, inverse sqrt, inverse, and power were obtained for estimating the CH_4 content. The residual errors were calculated for each model to check the goodness of the fit (Abdullah and Chin, 2010). The accuracy of the models was considered by calculating the standard error (SE), coefficient of determination (R ^2), and p-value (the p < 0.1 denoted significant effect for our models). For a good model, the p-values of the mixtures and chemical pretreatment factors should be significant and the p-value of the LF should be non-significant (Goos and Donev, 2005). The best model is selected using the criteria having a low SE for regression variables, high R ^2, suitable p-values of the mixture and pretreatment factor, and LF (Table 3 ). The model summary statistics have been given in Tables 3–5 . Usually, the highest order polynomial is selected where the additional terms are significant for both the mixture and pretreatment factor, and the model is not aliased (DuMouchel and Jones, 1994).

By comparing the models reported in Table 3, it was documented that R ^2, adjusted R^2 (AR ^2), and adequate precision (AP) of inverse transformation of y (1 y = 1 C H 4) (model 3) was more than the other models. The p-value of the mixture and pretreatment factor of the model 3 was lower than 0.1 denoted it was significant for these characteristics. The LF of model 3 was more than the other models (=0.63), and it was not significant which approved the model 3 was the best model among the models for estimating the CH_4 content. The predictive R^2 (PR ^2) of the model 3 was 0.81 in reasonable agreement with the AR ^2 of 0.89. The AP of the model was 17.95 indicated an adequate signal for the model approving the model could be used to navigate the design space. The AP, measuring the signal to noise ratio, greater than 4 is desirable (Goos and Donev, 2005). Furthermore, the SE of the model 3 (=0.004) was the least among the models. The analyses of variance of the model and their variables were completely reported in Table 4.

The model 3 (as the best model) was then modified carefully according to the significance of its variables and the finally modified model was acquired. As shown some of the variables existed in the model were not significant (p > 0.1) and better to delete from the model. If there are many non-significant terms in a model, it's model reduction (delete the non-significant terms) may improve the model (DuMouchel and Jones, 1994). In this content, the best modified model selected according to statistics for the CH_4 content estimation was determined as Eq. (6). FORMULA: 1 C H 4 = 0.028 A + 0.018 B + 0.054 C − 0.02 A B − 0.038 A C − 0.005 A D + 0.005 A E − 0.025 B C − 0.007 C D + 0.005 C E − 0.037 A C E which A, B, C, D, and E were cow manure, municipal waste, kitchen waste, NaOH, and H_2O_2, respectively. The R ^2, AR ^2, PR ^2, AP ^2, and Std of the modified model were 0.92, 0.89, 0.84, 22.66, and 0.004, respectively. The modified model coefficients and their ranges including model statistics have been reported in Table 5.

The SE and variance inflation factor (VIF) of the model variables have been reported in Table 5. The VIF measures how much the variances of the estimated regression coefficients are inflated in comparison when the predictor variables are not linearly related. A VIF equal to one approves the model coefficients is not correlated, VIF among 1–5 implies moderately correlated and VIF exceeding 10 indicates problems due to multicollinearity (Goos and Donev, 2005). As shown in the table, the SE of all the variables was very low documented all the variables were important in fitting the CH_4 content. Furthermore, the VIF of the modified model (Eq. (6)) was 1.711 that approved the model coefficients were moderated, multicollinearity and thereupon little inflation in the variance of the estimated model coefficients.

The diagnostic plots of the modified model (Eq. (6)) in Fig. 2 were illustrated to determine the model accuracy for the CH_4 content estimation. Normal probability plot of the studentized residuals (Fig. 2a) showed that the studentized residuals distributed, normally and the predicted values versus the experimental values (Fig. 2b) illustrated their distribution and estimation accuracy. It approved that the estimated values of 1/CH_4 were predicted very well near the experimental amounts of 1/CH_4. All the model statistics (Table 3‒5) and diagnostic plots (Fig. 2) were OK documented the model was very good for the CH_4 estimation and would be used to determine the optimum amounts of mixture and pretreatment factor.

The effects of the significant interactions, including mixture components (cow manure, municipal waste, and kitchen waste) and pretreatment factors (NaOH and H_2O_2), on the CH_4 content are graphically represented in Fig. 3 . The plots express the influence of the different mixtures and factors on 1/CH_4. As it is shown, the decrease of H_2O_2 and increase of NaOH for different mixtures separately caused to decrease 1/CH_4 (increase CH_4). Furthermore, the increase of municipal waste and cow manure and decrease the kitchen waste caused to decrease 1/CH_4. Totally, different trends were happened by the different mixtures and pretreatment factors. For example, the increase of the municipal waste and NaOH and the decrease of the cow manure in the constant kitchen waste and H_2O_2 caused to decrease 1/CH_4 (Fig. 3a). Accordingly, it could be concluded that the increase of the kitchen waste in the mixtures led to the reduction of the slope of the CH_4 production and the increase of the municipal waste caused to the addition of the slope of the CH_4 production. Furthermore, the increase of the H_2O_2 led to the reduction of the CH_4 contents (Fig. 3b, d, f), while the increase of the NaOH increased the CH_4 contents (Fig. 3a, c, e). Increasing the H_2O_2 may cause to increase toxicity or release of inhibitory compounds that affect the cellulolytic enzymes at higher levels of H_2O_2 pretreatment. It's better to be effective in high pH (pH > 10) (Kristen, 2012).

Contour plot (Fig. 4 a) and 3D surface plot (Fig. 4b) were generated based on Eq. (6) to find the optimum mixing proportion of the substrates by estimating different values of 1/CH_4 with changing the NaOH and H_2O_2 amounts. The contour and surface plots are useful for establishing desirable response values and mixture blends (Kaparaju and Rintala, 2008; Rao and Baral, 2011). Fig. 4 shows the estimated 1/CH_4 for the different substrate mixtures in which NaOH and H_2O_2 were held constant at 2%. Fig. 4 (a) shows that the zones of maximum response variables were located towards the side of triangle where had the most cow manure and municipal waste as the vertices. In fact, the maximum response was observed with co-digestion of cow manure and municipal waste. This indicates that to the certain extent, these waste proportions may be added to improve the CH_4 production and having a simultaneous effect to increase the CH_4 production. This can be verified by observing the mixture surface plot (Fig. 4b).

The optimum amounts of mixture components and pretreatment factors were determined using Design Expert software (Ver. 10) according to the modified model (Eq. (6)). The results showed that using the amounts of 84.8, 112.2, and 3 g (as proportions 42, 56, and 2%) of cow manure, municipal waste, and kitchen waste, respectively pretreated with NaOH (3.98%) and H_2O_2 (0.02%), the CH_4 estimation reached to most value. This was in agreement with the other researches as by adding NaOH to the slurry (about 4%), the CH_4 production increased, significantly while H_2O_2 had the lower effect on the CH_4 production (Teghammar et al., 2010; Kristen, 2012; Naegele et al., 2014). Adding NaOH explodes the volatile solids and releases COD and adding H_2O_2 at high pH and low temperature solves lignin and hemicellulose (Teghammar et al., 2010). These can able to increase the CH_4 production. As it was told, the selected optimum amounts were then used to produce the biogas at the semi-industrial biogas plant. The biogas compounds and microbial community for co-digestion of the substrates were compared among treated cases (OC-PMM: Interaction of OC and PMM, OC-MM: Interaction of OC and MM, UC-PMM: Interaction of UC and PMM, UC-MM: Interaction of UC and MM).


3.3 Biogas compounds of semi-industrial biogas plant

Two comparison processes were triggered with the biogas plant in this research, simultaneously, the biogas compounds and microbial communities in the OC and UC and in the PMM and MM usage. To this goal, the question should be considered that whether the optimum condition and PMM can enrich the CH_4 content by purifying the biogas through decreasing the other biogas compounds or not? Therefore, amounts of CH_4, H_2S, O_2, and CO were measured during 40 days for all the treated cases. The amounts of CH_4, H_2S, O_2, and CO versus the digestion days were illustrated in Fig. 5 for the conditions (UC and OC) and mixers (PMM and MM). The results showed that with co-digesting the substrates by the passing of time in the biogas plant, CH_4 increased with high intensity (Fig. 5a) while H_2S, O_2, and CO decreased with low intensity (Fig. 5b, c, d).

The results for UC showed that the CH_4 production of digestion with Pneu-mechanical mixing (PMD) during the digestion days of 5, 12, 35, and 40 were 0.01, 0.05, 53, and 40 %VOL, respectively (Fig. 5a). The CH_4 production of digestion with mechanical mixing (MD) during the digestion days of 5, 12, 35, and 40 were 0.02, 0.05, 40, and 30 %VOL, respectively. The values showed that the PMM could increase the average of CH_4 contents by 20.65% in comparison with the MM. A similar trend happened for the mixers under OC. As the CH_4 contents with PMD and MD were 10 and 10 %VOL after 5 days, reached the maximum amounts of 65 and 55 %VOL and finally decreased to 30 and 20 %VOL, respectively. The mean amount of CH_4 content during the digestion days for PMD was 18.75% more than MD. On the other hand, the results showed that the optimization process totally increased the average CH_4 contents of PMD and MD by 123.44 and 127.02%, respectively, in comparison with UC. The other compounds of biogas production decreased by optimizing the conditions.

As illustrated in Fig. 5b for UC, the H_2S content for PMD decreased to 2000 mg/L in the day 40, while for MD, it increased during the first 15 days and then decreased to 2000 mg/L in the day 40. The results showed that the average H_2S content of the PMD was totally 21% lower than the H_2S content of the MD. On the other hand, using the OC, the mean amount of H_2S content for PMD was 312.5% lower than the other digestion. The results approved that these methods, optimization of conditions and develop the mixers, were successful to remove H_2S. The PMM was more effective for H_2S clearing than OC because H_2S was solved in water by recirculation the biogas in the slurry using the PMM and its content decreased more significant (Van der Zee et al., 2007).

As illustrated in Fig. 5c, the amount of CO content of biogas production for the PMD was higher than the other digestion for both UC and OC. The high amount of CO for the PMD is due to recirculating back the biogas production in the digester (Lin and Chien, 2008). Of course, the optimization of conditions decreased the mean amount of CO content up to 28% in comparison with UC. The results of O_2 production for both UC and OC were illustrated in Fig. 5d. As shown the PMD could decrease the O_2 content of UC and OC around 28 and 141%, respectively, while it did not change in the MD. On the other hand, the optimization of conditions decreased O_2 a little. When the O_2 in a digester is high, the content of CO_2 and H_2O of biogas increases which is harmful for biogas production (Lin and Chien, 2008; Cacua et al., 2011).

The high amount of CO was a weak point, and the low amounts of H_2S and O_2 were the strength for PMM usage. Furthermore, the decreasing CO, H_2S, and O_2 was the strength for OC. As a result, coupled the PMM and OC could purify the biogas production very well by reduction of its harmful compounds and enrich the CH_4 production in the biogas. In recent years, some apparatuses were equipped with different membranes for biogas purification which were more expensive and complicated than our method. Most of them filter the biogas to enrich CH_4, while by improving the digestion conditions such as improve substrates, pretreatment, co-digestion, and develop digester structure, the microbial activities can be improved and thus purify the biogas.


3.4 Anaerobic microbial communities of biogas slurry

Microbial communities of anaerobic digestion have been intensively investigated in the past decades. Most of these researches concentrated upon correlating microbial diversity with biogas production. The relationship between microbial communities, digestion conditions, biogas production, and digestate composition should be described due to better understand microbial responses of digestion conditions (Dearman et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2011; Chen et al., 2016). For this obstacle, total colonies of anaerobic bacteria were counted for all treated cases and compared their communities. The total number of colonies was illustrated in Fig. 6 for two mixer types under OC and UC during the 40 days of digestion. The total number of colonies in the Pneu-mechanical digester was 21.65% more than that in the mechanical digester for both conditions. The number of colonies in OC grow up 3000% more than UC for both mixers. It is revealed in the figure that until day 35, the anaerobic microbial communities for the cases of OC-PMM, OC-MM, and UC-MM increased, significantly, and then decreased while the UC-PMM had a decrease during days of 20–25 and in the other days had the similar trend with the other treated cases. Totally, the trend of changes in the anaerobic microbial communities and the CH_4 production was the same agree with previous studies (Chen et al., 2016). The correlation coefficients between anaerobic microbial communities and CH_4, H_2S, CO, and O_2 concentrations for the mean amounts of OC and UC were determined as 0.86 (p < 0.05), −0.76 (p < 0.05), −0.64 (non-significant), and −0.71 (p < 0.05), respectively. In the other words by increasing the anaerobic microbial community, the CH_4 concentration increased and H_2S, CO, and O_2 concentrations decreased. We can say, by improving the slurry conditions, the anaerobic microbial communities can grow very well and cause to increase the CH_4 production and decrease the other biogas compounds. Although using the PMM got out of the trend for some days but totally, it could enrich the CH_4 production by purifying the biogas from H_2S. As mentioned in the literature, when the particle size reduces or the particle number increases, the specific surface area available to enzymes increases and so the CH_4 production increases (Tedesco et al., 2014). Furthermore, the particle size reduction is directly correlated with increased biomethanation (Krishania et al., 2013). These documents approve why the PMM can increase the anaerobic microbial communities. The PMM could mix the slurry in horizontal and vertical directions very well and therefore the biomass particles were more available for growing the anaerobic microbes than MM. After digestion day 35, by reducing the biomass particles (they were digested), the anaerobic microbial community decreased.

It can be concluded that the PMM can enrich the CH_4 production by purifying the biogas from H_2S and O_2 with increasing the anaerobic microbial activity. Furthermore, optimization of the conditions can increase the CH_4 production and decrease H_2S, CO, and O_2 very well by growing the anaerobic microbes. Indeed, a couple of these methods are superior, cheaper and faster methods to enrich the CH_4 than the other purification methods. Therefore, using the new mixers and optimization the digestion conditions is an appropriate research method which can optimize the CH_4 production from industrial biogas plants and help the researchers and factories.


4 Conclusion

In this research, a new mixer (PMM) was developed for an anaerobic stirred digester using coupled mechanical and pneumatic energy, and its quality was compared with MM according to microbial activity and biogas compounds. Furthermore, their performance was compared between OC and UC. In the OC, the amounts of cow manure, municipal waste, kitchen waste, NaOH, and H_2O_2 were 42, 56, 2, 3.98, and 0.02%, respectively, and in the UC, the substrates were mixed with the same amounts without pretreatment. The biogas analyses showed that the optimization process could increase the mean amount of CH_4 production by more than 123% and decrease the harmful compounds very well. On the other hand for the same conditions (OC or UC), the PMM was successful to decrease the harmful compound of H_2S and increase the CH_4 concentration about 20% but it increased CO concentration a little. The results showed similar trends between the CH_4 production and anaerobic microbial communities during the digestion days for all cases. The PMM increased the anaerobic microbial activity more than 21% documented it was not harmful to anaerobic microbial life in the digesters. Also, the optimization process increased the microbial communities more than 3000% for both mixer types approving a better mixture and pretreatment can provide a better environment for growing the anaerobic microbe. These analyses of the digestion with the new mixer and optimization process show that though technical obstacles remain, these methods can be used in the anaerobic digesters not only to improve the digestion conditions and anaerobic microbial activity but also to increase biogas production, purify it and enrich the CH_4 production by reducing the harmful compounds.