TITLE: Effect of pretreatments on cellulosic composition and morphology of pine needle for possible utilization as substrate for anaerobic digestion


1 Introduction

Lignocellulosic biomass (LCB), especially from forestry and woody residues is a promising source for bioenergy generation. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) along with Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations in a report highlighted the latest set of quantitative medium-term projections for world and national biofuel markets for the ten-year period 2018–27. Global biodiesel production is expected to reach 39.3 bln L by 2027 corresponding to a 9% increase from the 2017 [1]. However, the advanced biofuel (cellulosic ethanol) production still lack behind in competitive markets, when compared with the petroleum products. Lignocellulosic biomass based ethanol is projected to account for less than 1% of world ethanol production by 2025 [1,2]. There are several reasons for this disparity, which range from ethical (food-versus-fuel) to technical (lignocellulosic complexities) to economic (cost benefit ratio) constraints.

Waste residues from agricultural and forest resources have received much attention as potential source of lignocellulosic biomass (LCB) especially after the “food-versus-fuel” conflict which involves a trade-offs of utilizing grains and oilseeds for biofuels production versus animal feed and human food [3,4]. Based on OECD-FAO report, biofuel production is expected to consume 10.4% and 12% of global coarse grains and vegetable oil production respectively in 2025 [1,2]. It is in this context that exploring the potential of LCB, especially forest biomass, as a resource for sustainable bioenergy generation is highly promising. An estimated area of 3999 Mha is covered by forest resources globally [5] out of which 16% remain unutilized [6]. The need of the hour is to tap this unutilized LCB for subsequent bioenergy generation. Interestingly, recent studies suggest that the LCB can also have potential application in advanced biomaterial synthesis. Colloidal lignin particles because of their higher elemental carbon content and biocompatibility have been used for developing lignin nanoparticles for application in biomedical sciences [7,8]. Researchers have explored the forest residues, especially pine needles as renewable resources for bio-based polymeric materials and bioenergy and also fabricated nanofibrillated cellulose from pine needles [9,10] often designated as “Green cellulose based nanocomposite catalyst” [11]. Recently a “cellulose based bimetallic nanocomposite” was used for the green synthesis of dihydropyridines and polyhydroquinolines [12]. The use of cellulose-based biocomposites has been possible because of the fact that it is most common organic natural polymers. A few other properties like bio-degradability bio-compatibility, environmentally-friendly and most importantly variability towards a broad range of chemicals makes cellulose a potential biocomposite. On these very similar lines the development of lignin based nanoparticles could hold significant furistic potential. Therefore utilization of LCB in applications other than bioenergy generation can open up new avenues of sustainable economic benefits.

One of the major technical bottlenecks in effective utilization of the LCB is its complex cellular structure which hinders the availability of the substrate for enzymatic hydrolysis [13]. In this regard a pretreatment strategy can significantly improve the substrate availability [14]. Several methodologies of pretreatment viz. mechanical, chemical (alkali and acid pretreatment) and steam explosion have been proposed [15]. Combination of the pretreatment methods allows the breakage of ester bonds between hemicelluloses and lignin, thereby resulting in exposure of cellulose for enzymatic hydrolysis.

Pine forests all across the world have substantial accumulation of dried pine needle on forest floors, due to their slow degradation rate under natural environmental conditions [16,17]. The research from our previous study provided detailed insight into the scientific rationale behind the slow degradation rate of pine needle litter fall on forest floors [11]. The scientific investigation led to the inference that the two major factors governing slow degradation rates were: (a) the lignocellulosic complexities of pine needle and (b) pine needle litter associated autochthonous microbial community. In India an estimated 8,90,000 ha is under Chir forests, where the pine needle litter remains on the forest floors largely unutilized [18,19]. Therefore, this untapped forest biomass of pine litter can be a potential substrate for renewable bioenergy generation. However, the presence of high degree of lignin in polymerized state, poses significant hindrance for substrate availability.

The research from our previous studies [20] have essentially focused on understanding the lignocellulosic complexities associated with pine needle litter fall and its slow degradation on the forest floors. Sequential pretreatment strategy resulted in substantial increase of substrate availability and consequent utilization of forest pine needle litter in biogas production using anaerobic digestion [21]. However, our previous studies were not able to decipher the structural and physicochemical changes in the pine needle post pretreatment and post anaerobic digestion. Therefore, in the present study the use of analytical techniques viz. FE-SEM coupled with EDS have been helpful in providing structural insights into the LCB at the micro scale. The use of EDS for determining the elemental composition of lignocellulosic biomass has been described as an effective tool by several researchers [22,23]. The use of FT-IR studies further aided in deciphering the chemical structure of lignocellulosic rich pine needle forest biomass. In the present study, the detailed analytical studies further showed the presence of carbon rich lignin droplets on the surface of pretreated pine needle biomass. These findings suggest the sequential pretreatment methodology used in the present study could potentially also be used in the biosynthesis of lignin based nanoparticles.


2 Methods


2.1 Pretreatment of pine needle litter forest biomass

Naturally dried pine needle samples, were collected from pine forest floors of Kandaghat pine forest range: 31° 00′ 57″ N; 77° 04′ 17″ E in Himachal Pradesh. A three step methodology involving sequential physicochemical pretreatment viz. milling, steam explosion and acid-base-acid pretreatment was employed. Briefly, the physical methods included grinding (milling) the dried pine needles in an electric blender. The milled samples were sieved through a mesh of (20 mesh size). Another method employed was steam explosion of pine needles, which involved autoclaving of pine needles in flask plugged with non-absorbent cotton at 121 °C for 30 min. The chemical method employed the use of repeated exposure of LCB to acid (HCl) and alkali (NaOH) (acid–base–acid treatment) with 30 min cycle, until the wash out liquid was clear. This was followed with repeated washings with water until neutral pH of the wash out liquid was obtained. The pretreated LCB was dried before further experimentation. This three step methodology involving sequential physicochemical pretreatment viz. milling, steam explosion and acid-base-acid pretreatment resulted in significant increase in hollocellulose content and a corresponding decrease in lignin content. . A detailed description of the pretreatment methodology has been outlined in our previous study [21] where we were not able to decipher the structural and physicochemical changes in the pine needle post pretreatment and post anaerobic digestion. These gaps have been address in the present manuscript.


2.2 Analysis of pre-treated pine needle forest litter


2.2.1 Morphological modifications

Ultra-structural and surface morphology of pine needle samples were analysed through Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopic (FE-SEM) analysis. FE-SEM (Carl Zeiss Jena, Germany) analysis was conducted under extended low vacuum conditions. All the samples of pine needle (before and after pretreatment) were spread on the carbon tape and analysed with an accelerating voltage of 15 kV using Quanta 200 FEG.


2.2.2 Elemental modifications


2.2.2.1 Field emission Scanning Electron Microscopy - energy dispersive spectroscopy (FE-SEM-EDS) analysis

In order to gain a better understanding of the elemental composition of the pine needle and understand the overall effect of pretreatment all the samples were stained with 1% (w/w) KMnO_4 solution and coated with gold for FE-SEM-EDS analysis with an accelerating voltage of 15 kV. The instrument was equipped with Oxford instruments X-MaxN 80T SDD energy disperse spectroscopy (EDS).


2.2.2.2 Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy analysis

The functional moieties associated with different components lignin; cellulose and hemicellulose of pine needles before and after pretreatment; anaerobically digested pine needles, were evaluated using FT-IR analysis in PerkinElmer FT-IR Spectrophotometer model-65. The samples were prepared for FT-IR analysis using KBr technology, i.e. by making pellets of samples with KBr. Data was recorded in the spectral range of 400–4000 cm^−1 with a 2 cm^−1 resolution.


2.3 Anaerobic digestion (AD) of pine needle litter

Pine needle forest litter was assessed for its potential use in renewable bioenergy generation. For this evaluation, anaerobic digestion was carried out in 500 ml glass bottles, fitted with rubber stoppers. A digestion mixture of 100 ml (1:1 inoculum to substrate ratio) was digested anaerobically. The bottles were flushed with argon gas to create anaerobic conditions and incubation was carried out at 50 °C for 60 days. The composition of gas phase (CH_4, H_2, CO_2), the amount of volatile fatty acids (VFA) in the liquid phase, pH, DW and volatile solids (VS) content, humidity of mixtures were measured regularly by gas chromatography in accordance with the procedures as described previously [21]. In the present study, the changes in the chemical composition of the digested pine needles was assessed using FT-IR spectroscopically analysis as outlined in the above section.


3 Results and discussion

In the present study, comparative analysis of sequentially pretreated pine needles using analytical techniques such as FE-SEM, EDS and FT-IR has been carried out in order to access the structural and compositional modification in pine needles. Comparative analysis on the functional attributes of the anaerobically digested pine needles has also been studied based on FT-IR analysis. The use of similar analytical techniques has been successfully employed by researchers recently [24,25].

Our previous findings revealed that dried pine needle samples accounted for 18.05% holocellulose content, 23.36 mg/g of acid-soluble lignin and 475 mg/g of acid-insoluble residue [12]. Findings reported in our previous research [21] revealed the sequential physicochemical pretreatment viz. milling, steam explosion and acid-base-acid pretreatment resulted in significant increase in hollocellulose content and a corresponding decrease in lignin content. The final pretreatment process (acid–base–acid treatment) in ‘‘Stage III’’ accounted for 65.92% increase in holocellulose content and a 21.34% decrease in total lignin content over the holocellulose and lignin content of ‘‘Stage II’’ pretreated LCB substrate. A detailed account of the changes in the holocellulose and lignin content have been previously described in earlier report [21].


3.1 Morphological changes in pine needle post pretreatment

The lignocellulosic rich biomass is resistant to degradation because hemicellulose and lignin together form 3-D mesh-like clusters which prevent conversion of biomass to fermentable sugars by the enzymatic processes [26]. The choice of the use of SEM has also been recommended to describe anatomical features and degradation at cellular and nano-resolution of lignocellulosic biomass surfaces. Several researchers [27–31] have evaluated the success of pretreatment on the lignocellulosic substrate availability using SEM. Recently the researchers used FE-SEM technique for microscopic examination of lignocellulosic biomass [32]. In the present study we studied the effect of pretreatment using high-resolution imaging of cell wall surfaces by FE-SEM, which aided in better visualization of the organization of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin microfibrils and their cross-links. The advantage of the FE-SEM technique is that it can reveal the fibrillar organization of the cell wall surface in nm detail. However, other microscopy techniques such as fluorescence microscopy and even super-resolution variants, could not resolve the microfibrillar details (3-nm wide) especially in case of densely packed walls. When studying microfibril-matrix organization, FE-SEM has preferred usage over TEM, because of low variations in electron density within cell walls [33–36].

In the present study, FE-SEM micrographs of milled pine needles (Fig. 1 a, c, e, h, j) were compared with that of sequentially pretreated pine needle (Fig. 1 b, d, f, g, i, k). The observations were made on the basic of (a) surface abnormalities in cells surrounding stomatal opening (b) changes in orderly arrangement of interwoven fibrils (c) exposure of vascular bundle (d) lignin coalescence.

The ultrastructure of epidermal tissue in case of milled pine needle (Fig. 1a, c, e) showed mostly regular surface with stomata and cell walls. However, some individual fibrils were also observed. An orderly arrangement and to some extent stacked individual cells were also observed with thickened and closely interwoven fibrils. The cellulose molecules were observed to be bound to hemicellulose and lignin thus forming structures which are referred to as microfibrils, which are further organized into macrofibrils. Following sequential pretreatment (milling; steam explosion and acid-base-acid pretreatment), the first signs of disintegration of the macro and micro fibrils was clearly evident (Fig. 1d). The closely interwoven fibrils were separated apart and thus were structurally exposed (Fig. 1d, g). Post final pretreatment striking difference in stomatal openings was observed when compared to stomatal openings in milled pine needles. The structural rigidity of the stomata was disintegrated (indicated by arrows comparison of Fig. 1 c (milled) and Fig. 1 d (following sequential pretreatment). Deterioration in surface structure and formation of lamella was also observed. Detailed introspection of the micrographs at higher magnification (Fig. 1 f) revealed that the pine needle surface was completely torn open, and the vascular bundle was also exposed, when compared to milled pine needles (Fig. 1 e). The exposed independent fibres indicated further deterioration of cell walls, resulting in an increased surface area (Fig. 1g), therefore resulting in more sites accessible for microbial attack. Fig. 1(h–k) provided further structural insights at higher magnifications (5.00 KX and 10.00 KX). Mechanical pretreatment resulted in initial fragmentation of the hemicellulose and lignin cross-links since the fibers become rougher and disordered. However, the agglomerates of amorphous region of lignin could be seen closely and orderly bound with the surface (Fig. 1 h, j). Further sequential pretreatment resulted in efficient removal of the agglomerates of amorphous region of lignin (Fig. 1 i, k). Appearance of droplets and deposition of coalescent material on pretreated biomass surface was also observed (marked by arrows (Fig. 1 d). Previous documented reports have also provided evidence towards formation of similar lignin droplets. Micic et al. [37] employed the use of microscopic techniques (atomic force microscopy (AFC) and SEM) and reported that lignin globules, were highly ordered structures, which were held together by strong intermolecular forces. Radotic et al. [38] also revealed modular and fractal organization of lignin globules using diverse microscopic techniques viz. in vitro scanning tunnelling microscopy, AFC, near-field scanning optical microscopy and SEM. Donohoe et al. [27] reported isolation of lignin droplets from corn stem rind. The lignocellulosic substrate was pretreated using dilute sulfuric acid; hot water; cooled by quenching in an ice water bath. The authors visualized lignin coalescence using SEM and TEM analysis and reported presence of lignin in the droplets using FT-IR and other analytical techniques. They further reported that, the size, abundance and distribution of the lignin droplets largely depend upon the pretreatment strategy and the chemical interactions involved in the process. Thus, findings in the present study, with respect to lignin coalescence are in tune with the reports from these researchers.

In the present study, the combined forces of physicochemical pretreatments considerably weakened the overall pine needle structure. There was appreciable change in the pine needle ultrastructural arrangements with increased stomatal pore volume and external surface area. The fiber bundles were disrupted resulting in removal of cross-linking structures between hemicelluloses and lignin thus exposing the of cellulose fibrils. Thus, visualization of the pretreated lignocellulosic rich forest biomass confirms the solubilization and separation of the lignin-hemicellulose complex and thus making the resulting biomass available for further enzymatic hydrolysis by microorganisms. Findings in the present study are in concomitance with the observations of previous researches who have reported that mechanical forces can cause the fibrils in the lignocellulosic rich biomass to break due to an explosive expansion in the biomass because of the water steam. Further degradation and removal of the cross-links can be brought about by the chemical effect of acid-base-acid treatment [39,40].


3.2 Compositional changes in pine needle post pretreatment


3.2.1 Energy dispersive X-Ray spectroscopy (EDS)

The FE-SEM micrographs were also scanned for studying the effect of pretreatment on elemental status of samples by an energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). In milled pine needles, when the complete FE-SEM microscopic field (Fig. 2 a) was scanned, the results revealed presence of elements C and O with an atomic percentage of 66.35% and 33.65% respectively. Post final pretreatment (milling; steam explosion; acid-base-acid pretreatment), atomic percentage of C and O elements was 68.14% and 31.86% respectively (Fig. 2e). An increase of 2.69% in the atomic percentage of elemental C post final pretreatment indicates separation of lignin complex and release of cellulose for enzymatic hydrolysis. The conclusions drawn here are in accordance with the report of [41] who reported that lignin contains the highest proportion of the carbon element, followed by hemicellulose and cellulose. Further EDS scanning of the milled pine needles was carried out at selective microscopic fields (Fig. 2b–d). In-spite of increased microscopic resolution (Fig. 2a–c) the atomic percentage of elemental C continued to decrease from 66.35% to 59.05%. However, post final pretreatment, with increase in microscopic resolution (Fig. 2e–g) the atomic percentage of elemental C significantly increased from 68.14% to 79.64%. The findings further validated the fact that final pretreatment resulted in significant disintegration of the lignin cross-links which were earlier bound to cellulose. Spectral analysis of the an unattached micro-fibril in milled pine needle at a microscopic resolution of 100 μm (Fig. 2d) revealed that initial mechanical injury was effective in separating the cellulose from the lignin bound cross links to some extent. The findings can be correlated with our previous findings, where we reported milling to be an effective pretreatment method for release of cellulose from the lignocellulosic fibers, with 84.82% increase in holocellulose content [21]. However, it is pertinent to mention here that a number of other elemental components were also observed in the spectral analysis (C, O, Na, Si, Cl and K). The role of these elemental components (especially Si, Na) in influencing the substrate availability for enzymatic hydrolysis needs to be further explored. These elements were not observed in the spectral analysis of samples which were further pretreated (steam explosion followed by acid base acid pretreatment). There is possibility of these elements (especially Si) to form associations with lignin. Castellano et al. [42] reported that Si–OR condenses with the phenolic OH of lignin. They further reported higher reactivity of siloxanes towards lignin as compared to cellulose because of higher acidity of the phenolic OH in case of lignin as compared to aliphatic OH groups in cellulose. As discussed in the previous section that on the surface of pretreated biomass there was an appearance of droplets (lignin droplets) and deposition of coalescent materials. Here by using combinational analytical approach (FE-SEM-EDS) we further analysed the lignin droplets (Fig. 3 a–d). EDS spectral analysis of FE-SEM micrograph (Fig. 3d) was carried out which indicates that the elemental composition of droplets was C, O, Al and Ca. The atomic percentage of C ranged from 67.59 to 67.84% which is the range of atomic percentage of C (68.14%–79.64%) in EDS scans of the entire pretreated biomass (Fig. 2e and g). The high elemental C indicates that the droplets constituted mainly of lignin component. The findings are in corroboration with previous findings of Cao et al. [41], where they reported that the lignocellulosic biomass comprised of 61% elemental C (from lignin); while 42% and 40% elemental C was from cellulose and hemicellulose. Similar to present findings lignin droplets were also visualized on the LCB surface post thermo-chemical pretreatment [27]. They further concluded that as a result of the high temperature (above lignin melting temperatures) during thermo-chemical pretreatment (dilute 0.8% H_2SO_4 at 170 °C and hot water at 220 °C), the lignin coalescences and migrate and finally get redeposited on the cell wall of LCB.

Furthermore, previous researchers [43] based on the thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) of pine needle (raw fiber) suggest that between temperature ranges (26.0 °C–190.0 °C) the beginning depolymerization, dehydration, and glucosan formation takes place, which is followed by the cleavage of C–H, C–C and C–O bonds. Findings from these studies revealed that the final degradation temperatures for natural fiber reinforced composites (pine needles) were lower than that of polymer composites. These observations indicate which indicates that the presence of cellulose fibers had a significant effect on the thermal stability. The findings of the present study are in corroboration with the conclusions drawn based on TGA analysis.

These findings highlight the fact that a pretreatment methodology can be regarded as effective even if it just results in the movement of lignin far away from the cellulose micro fibrils.


3.2.2 Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR)

The effect of pretreatment on the chemical structure of pine needle was further analysed based on the changes in the functional group of the lignin-cellulose complex moieties. The data was recorded in the region of 4000–400 cm^−1. The spectral regions with most significant changes (absorption intensities) were observed pre and post final pretreatment (Table 1 ). The comparison of the findings in the present study with that of former reports have also been presented in the tabulated from in Table 1. The use of FT-IR spectroscopy analysis has been advocated by several researchers, since the technique is much simple and provides rapid information when compared to conventional chemical analysis techniques. Additionally, small sample requirements and non-destructive nature of samples makes the FT-IR technique more suitable for analysis of LCB [44,45].

In the present study, within the spectral range 1167–1151 cm^−1, which corresponds to ester bond stretching of lignin and carbohydrate, the absorption intensities post final pretreatment were significantly lower (Table S1). In milled pine needle samples, the ester bond stretching of lignin and carbohydrate was observed majorly in the spectral region viz. 1159-1161 cm^−1; 1155-1158 cm^−1 however, post final pretreatment, the stretching was observed over a wider spectral region viz. 1160-1163 cm^−1; 1156-1159 cm^−1; 1151-1155 cm^−1, thus indicating significant effect of the final pretreatment in modification of the biomass. After this region a peak at 1263 cm^−1 was observed, the intensity of which was decreased by 45.92%. A similar peak at 1258 cm^−1 was reported to be associated with hemicellulose [46], whereby they reported effective removal of hemicellulose in case of pretreated jute fibres (chemically and mechanically). A closer observation of the spectra (1263-1267 cm^−1) post final pretreatment indicated stretching of the hemicellulose bonds. The observations thus indicated effective modification in the hemicellulose structure as result of sequential pretreatments. The next target spectral region (1359–1322 cm^−1) corresponds to phenol hydroxyl moieties whereby the milled pine needles accounted for higher absorbance in this region as compared to final pretreated pine needles. A distinct peak at wave number 1339 cm^−1 was observed in case of milled pine needle, however, in the final pretreated sample, phenol hydroxyl stretching in lignin was observed (Supplementary Table 1). In milled pine needles, stretching was observed in spectral region 1354-1356 cm^−1; 1323-1325 cm^−1, however, post final pretreatment the phenol hydroxyl stretching in lignin was observed over a wider spectral region 1355-1359 cm^−1; 1322-1326 cm^−1, thus further indicating effect of final pretreatment in structural modification of lignin.

Post final pretreatment within the spectral region (1428–1425 cm^−1), an overall decrease in absorption intensities was observed (43.75%–44.19%), thus indicating appreciable breakage in the aromatic ring of lignin. A sharp peak at 1400 cm^−1 was observed, absorption intensity of which significantly decreased (42.84%) post final pretreatment, thus further indicating simplification in the complex lignin structure post final pretreatment.

While studying effect of pretreatment on Eucalyptus globulus [26] reported presence of bands attributable to lignin (1500 cm^−1, 1605 cm^−1). In the present study, we observed peak at wave number 1516 cm^−1. The absorption intensity of this peak decreased by 43.89% post final pretreatment (Table S1). Moreover, stretching in band was observed post final pretreatment in region 1513-1516 cm^−1. A highly prominent peak at 1595 cm^−1 with a 41.99% decrease in absorption intensity after final pretreatment was observed indicating modification in the lignin structure.

Absorption band location (cm^−1) between 1731 and 1720 represents CO stretch of ketone/aldehyde [47]. In case of milled pine needle, region between 1722 and 1725 cm^−1 corresponded to the CO stretch of ketone/aldehyde as is indicated by the absorption intensities. Post final pretreatment, this stretching was not observed. Interestingly, at 1734 cm^−1 a distinct peak was observed in milled pine needle, intensity of which reduced significantly by almost 49.68% after final pretreatment (Table S1). This significant decrease in intensity indicates degradation of the ester bond linkage between hemicellulose and lignin. A signal at 1745 cm^−1 was reported by Ref. [48] and found to be associated with degradation of ester bond between hemicellulose and lignin in Phoenix canariensis. They also reported a peak at approximately 2900 cm^−1 for Phoenix canariensis and Opuntia ficus-indica biomass which corresponds to C–H stretching vibration of cellulose/lignin. In the present study, in case of milled pine needle at wave number 2933 cm^−1 a peak with strong absorption was observed. However, after final pre-treatment treatment C–H stretching vibration was observed between wavenumber 2933-2935 cm^−1 (Supplementary Table 1). Reported literature suggests that absorption band location (cm^−1) from 2937 to 2918 cm^−1 represents –CH stretch of methyl and methylene groups of cellulose [49].

Within 3600–3100 cm^−1 region, representing H bond of OH group of cellulose [49], an overall absorption intensity of bands was higher in case of milled pine needle as compared to final pretreated pine needle. The percent change between the two samples ranged from 45.84% to 47.09%, with maximum change (decrease in absorption intensity) observed at 3442 cm^−1 wave number. Further changes in peak absorbance at 3162 cm^−1 and 3334 cm^−1 indicated weakening in cellulose hydrogen bonds, thus indicating that cellulose has become accessible for enzymatic hydrolysis.

The ratio between the areas of the bands at 1430 cm^−1 and 898 cm^−1 is used as a lateral order index of cellulose (LOI) [50]. Different researchers have reported the use different wavenumbers for calculating LOI, for instance Phitsuwan et al. [51] used the ratio of absorbance at 1430 cm^−1 and 902 cm^−1 to calculate lateral order index (LOI) of cellulose. In the present study, based on the spectral analysis, the peaks were obtained at wave number 1400 cm^−1; 898 cm^−1 therefore, we used absorption intensities of these wavenumber for calculating LOI. Milled pine needles accounted for higher LOI ratio (2.84), whereas post final pretreatment lower LOI ratio (2.80) was observed, thus accounting for 1.32% decrease in LOI ration. The observation indicates that in milled pine needles the cellulose structure was more ordered, which as a result of sequential pretreatment (milling; steam explosion; acid-base-acid pretreatment) was structurally modified. The findings are in line with our observations from FE-SEM micrographs (as discussed in the above sections). The findings are also in corroboration with report from Ref. [52], who reported decreased LOI value for wheat straw after pretreatment with NaOH/Urea solution.


3.3 FT-IR analysis of pretreated pine needles after anaerobic digestion (AD)

Anaerobic digestion (AD) of the pretreated biomass resulted in 21.4% higher methane levels as compared to untreated pine litter [21]. In the present study, using FT-IR spectroscopic analysis we were able to compare (a) influence of AD process on milled pine needles and (b) influence of AD process on pine needles post sequential pretreatment.

Detailed comparison of the absorption intensities revealing significant variations is presented in Table S2. The results indicated that sequentially pretreated pine needles proved to be a better substrate for AD process as compared to milled pine needles. The functional group of lignin cellulose complex moieties were exposed to a greater extent, because of sequential pretreatment and therefore, were available for microbial degradation during AD process. At 1400 cm^−1 and 1595 cm^−1 wavenumber, 8.02% and 9.22% respective increase in absorption intensity post AD was observed in case of milled pine needle. However, when sequentially pretreated pine needles were anaerobically digested, a 69.94% and 76.57% increase in absorption intensity was observed. Thus, indicating that because of effective separation of lignin from cellulose and hemicellulose complex and simultaneous modification in lignin structure, the diverse microbial communities within the AD were able effectively utilize the pine needle as substrate. The inference is further strengthened by the observation that at wavenumbers 3334 cm^−1 and 3442 cm^−1 absorption intensities increased by 56.53% and 47.91% when sequentially pretreated pine needles were anaerobically digested. However, in case when milled pine needles were anaerobically digested, the absorption intensities increased by only 1.21% and 2.97%. The wavenumbers 3334 cm^−1 and 3442 cm^−1 are associated with H bond of OH group of cellulose [48,49]. The findings, thus clearly indicate that because of significant microbial activity during AD process (where pretreated pine needles were used), there was substantial weakening in cellulose hydrogen bonds, which contributed to the overall success of AD process and higher methane production rates, as compared to AD process with untreated pine needles [21]. Pilot scale studies for evaluation of the pretreated pine needle as a potential source of bioenergy generation are in progress, for further validation of the technology.


4 Conclusions

In conclusion, the study suggested that the sequential pretreatment of pine needle milling followed by steam explosion and acid-base-acid pretreatment modifies the lingo-cellulosic complexities and improve fibril accessibility due to disruption of crosslinking between the lignin-hemicellulose and cellulose. The FT-IR analysis of anaerobically digested pretreated pine needles also confirmed the effectiveness of sequential pretreatment strategy for unlocking the potential of lignocellulosic rich forest biomass.

The study also provide a future application of pretreatment in synthesis of lignin based biomaterials because of their biocompatibility, smooth structural surface and bio stability under physiological conditions [53–55] for applications in biomedical sciences [7,8,25,56,57]. The FE-SEM data indicated the presence of carbon rich lignin droplets on the surface of pretreated pine needle biomass which indicated that this pretreatment methodology could also result in synthesis of such colloidal lignin particles which could serve as interesting nanocomposites, for application in biomaterial applications. However, much detailed studies are needed to standardise the extraction procedure for these lignin-based nano-materials.


 Funding information

The research was funded by the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India, for Indo-Russian collaborative project ‘‘Elucidating the linkage between key limiting processes and microorganisms during anaerobic degradation of lignocellulosic waste’’ INT/RUS/RFBR/P-175.


Appendix A Supplementary data

The following is the Supplementary data to this article:


Appendix A Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2020.105705.