TITLE: Enhancement of anaerobic digestion efficiency of wastewater sludge and olive waste: Synergistic effect of co-digestion and ultrasonic/microwave sludge pre-treatment


1 Introduction

The substantial increase in the worldwide agricultural activities has recently resulted in the production of an important amount of agro-wastes. Among the existing agricultural activities, olive is one of the most economically important fruit species in the Mediterranean countries (Sensi et al., 2003). The Mediterranean region (Spain, Italy, Greece, Turkey, Tunisia, Morocco, Syria, and Portugal) is the major production area, constituting for more than 90% of world production (FAO, 2007). Turkey is the fourth biggest olive-producing country in the world and is ranked fifth in olive oil and second in table olive production. Most of the olive production in Turkey occurs in the Aegean, Marmara and Mediterranean regions accounting for approximately 65-Mton agricultural wastes production annually from the vegetable-processing activities (Mendilcioglu, 2001).

The main environmental impacts produced by fruit processing activities such as wineries correspond to pomace generation (residuals solid). The olive pomaces possess very high levels of biochemical oxygen demand and if not treated properly; facing with the problems of odour and microbial contamination inside the winery is inevitable (Cáceres et al., 2012).

Regarding the abundant sources of agricultural residues, the most common “waste-to energy” application is the anaerobic digestion (AD) process. The commonly used substrates in anaerobic digestion are livestock manure, organic fraction of the municipal solid waste, food processing waste, energy crops, agricultural residues, etc. (Ralph and Keith, 1990; Mähnert and Linke, 2009; Murto et al., 2004; Neves et al., 2006).

Preliminary studies had shown that the anaerobic digestion of the agricultural products alone was, however, not so efficient. In general, hydrolysis is the rate limiting step if the substrate is in particulate form (Veeken and Hamelers, 1999). However, when the substrate is cellulose-poor wastes like from fruit processing activities, the AD process is limited by methanogenesis rather than by hydrolysis. The major constraints for the anaerobic digestion of fruit and vegetable processing wastes like olive pomace, maize silage, etc. were rapid acidification of these wastes and production of high amounts of volatile fatty acids (VFA), which decrease the pH in the reactor and inhibit the activity of methanogenic bacteria (Misi and Forster, 2002; Bouallagui et al., 2005). Furthermore, the agricultural products have a carbon-to-nitrogen (C/N) ratio of about 40–70, whereas the suggested optimum C/N ratio for anaerobic digestion is in the range of 20–30 (Parkin and Owen, 1986).

Over the last 15–20 years, this consideration has driven several authors to study the performance of the anaerobic digestion process through the simultaneous treatment of solid and liquid organic wastes. This method known as “co-digestion” enhances the digestion efficiency due to the synergistic effect of the different organic substrates (Misi and Forster, 2002; Sosnowski et al., 2003). The addition of co-substrates with appropriate nitrogen content is a simple solution to adjust nutrient content of these kinds of wastes. The addition of the waste activated sludge (WAS) characterized by a low C/N ratio was regarded as an important co-substrate in the anaerobic digestion of fruit and vegetable wastes (Gomez et al., 2006; Gannoun et al., 2007). Hawkes reported that mixing sewage sludge having a C/N ratio of about 6–16 (Tchobanoglous et al., 1993) to these agricultural residual products can result in the production of a mixture with a C/N ratio in the optimal range 20–30 (Hawkes, 1980).

The anaerobic digestion process, on the other hand, consists of four stages; hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis and methanogenesis; of which the biological hydrolysis is identified as the rate-limiting step if the substrates are not readily soluble. However, pre-treatment of wastewater sludges through several chemical, thermal, biological or mechanical methods can speed up the hydrolysis step. These pre-treatment (disintegration) methods reduce the particle size and accelerate the solubilization (hydrolysis) of sludge solids which subsequently improves anaerobic digestion (Carrere et al., 2010; Müller, 2000; Tiehm et al., 2001; Braguglia et al., 2015; Gonzalez-Fernandez et al., 2015; Cesaro et al., 2014).

This study investigates the effects of both co-digestion process and the different sludge pre-treatment methods on the biogas production from olive pomace and wastewater sludges. Ultrasonication and microwave pre-treatment methods were applied to the sludge samples prior to digestion in order to improve the biodegradability. This is the first study dealing with the co-digestion of olive pomace with pre-treated wastewater sludges in literature with the objective of enhancing biogas production.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Substrates

The reactors were seeded with an anaerobically digested sludge (inoculum) obtained from a mesophilically operated anaerobic digester of a yeast factory in Turkey. Wastewater treatment plant sludge samples were taken from the return activated sludge stream of one of the advanced biological wastewater treatment plant in Istanbul, Turkey.

The wastewater sludge samples were added directly into the reactors at the time of arrival. The olive pomace, supplied from an olive farm, was stored in a cold room at 4 °C. Prior to addition into the reactors, pomace samples were shredded into small particles, brought to room temperature.

All the substrates were analyzed for their total solid (TS) and volatile solid (VS) contents. The volatile fractions of dry matter for sludge and olive pomace samples were in the range of 58.99–75.16% TS, respectively.

In this study, elemental analyzer COSTECH ECS 4010 was used to determine the elemental ratios of carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) contents of the substrates to calculate the C/N ratios. The characteristics of inoculum, wastewater sludge and olive pomace used in the study are presented in Table 1 .


2.2 Sampling and analytical methods

The mono and co-digestion experiments were performed in seven duplicated (total of fourteen) batch-fed anaerobic reactors operated at 37 °C for 30 days.

Each reactor has 2500 mL of total and 1600 mL of active digestion volume. The inoculum to substrate ratios (ISR) in the reactors were adjusted to 1/1 on weight basis. Organic loading rates were calculated on the basis of the initial VS additions per volume of digester liquid per unit time. The reactors were filled with selected substrates and inoculum, then sealed to go through the anaerobic digestion process.

Biogas production in the reactors was monitored daily and the biogas compositions were analyzed once a week to understand the degree of waste stabilization throughout the study. In each reactor, the volume of produced biogas was measured by using Miligascounters ® (Ritter MGC 1, Germany). The biogas composition as methane and carbon dioxide was analyzed by using an HP 6850 gas chromatograph (Carboxen 1010 plot column 30 m × 0.53 mm) equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD). Helium gas was used as the carrier gas (2 mL min^−1). In the study, evaluation of biogas production was made based on the corrected biogas and methane yields according to standard temperature and pressure.

Particle size measurements were carried out by using a particle size analyzer (Malvern Mastersizer 2000 with the wet dispersion unit of Hydro 2000MU). The instrument uses the technique of laser diffraction to measure the size of particles. Water was used as dispersant liquid and its refractive index was 1.33. Sludge samples had refractive index of 1.5. The stirrer and pump speeds were kept at 600 rpm, which is the minimum pump/stirrer speed of the instrument, to eliminate the potential damage to the sludge flocs. During particle size analysis, the samples were diluted in a dispersion tank and introduced into the measuring cell. Each sample was analyzed in triplicate.

In the study, total coliform (SM9222B), Escherichia coli (SM9222D) and fecal streptococci (SM9230C) analyses were conducted by using a membrane filtration technique, as described in Standard Methods (APHA, 2015). Chemical analyses were also carried out in duplicate according to Standard Methods (APHA, 2015).

The Independent Sample t-Test was used to compare cumulative biogas production data of each parallel reactor set with a 95% confidence level. Pearson’s correlation coefficient (p) was used to evaluate the linear correlation between parallel reactors. Pearson’s coefficient is always between −1 and +1, in which −1 denotes a perfect negative correlation, +1 denotes a perfect positive correlation, and 0 denotes the absence of a relationship. The comparison among the reactors were done by the determination of rational differences between the measurements of parameters in the parallel reactors.


2.3 Content of the reactors

The olive pomace samples were shredded using a blender. Homogenized pomace and sludge samples were added into the reactors. The initial TS concentrations of the reactors were adjusted to 6.5% based on the preliminary batch anaerobic digestion studies on different TS contents (TUBITAK-KAMAG, 2013). The pH values of the reactors were kept around 7.0–7.5 by using 1 N KOH and H_2SO_4 in order to provide appropriate conditions for the growth of methanogens. Afterwards, the reactors were sealed airtight and purged with nitrogen gas for 5 min in order to displace oxygen from the system and establish anaerobic conditions. The content of the reactors are given in Table 2 .

Reactor R1 containing just inoculum sludge was operated as the control reactor. The mixtures of olive pomace and wastewater sludges were prepared on a weight (w/w) basis.

The reactors R2, R3 and R4 were operated to investigate the effect of co-digestion of olive pomace and wastewater sludge on the biogas production and solids reduction. The other reactors R5, R6 and R7 were operated to see the synergistic effect of sludge pre-treatment and co-digestion process on biogas production.


2.4 Application of sludge pre-treatment

Sludge samples were ultrasonically pre-treated by using an ultrasonic homogeniser (Bandelin-Sonopuls HD 3400) at the frequency of 20 kHz, 70% amplitude and a supplied power of 200 W. The samples were ultrasonicated for 15 and 30 min to obtain specific energies of 15,000 and 25,000 kJ/kg TS, respectively.

Thermal disintegration was applied by using a Microwave (MW) Digestion Unit (Berghoff Speedwave MWS-3+). A staged temperature profile was applied for the pre-treatment. In literature, the optimum microwave temperature is in the range of 160–180 °C, while the application times vary from 30 to 60 min. The applied pressures to reach these temperatures are in the range of 600–2500 kPa (Weemaes and Verstraete, 1998). In this study, the microwave pre-treatment was applied to the sludge samples for 30 min at 175 °C and 2000 kPa, based on the results of a preliminary MW optimization study held for different pressures, temperatures and application times (TUBITAK-KAMAG, 2013).

Disintegration Degree (DD) and Specific Energy (SE) are two important parameters to quantify sludge disintegration.

Disintegration Degrees (DD_COD) of sludge samples were calculated based on the formula by Müller et al. (1998). The supernatant chemical oxygen demand (SCOD) of the sludge samples were obtained by alkaline hydrolysis (SCOD_NaOH) and the sludge sample was mixed with NaOH (in the ratio of 1 mol/L) for 24 h at room temperature as described by Bougrier et al. (2015): FORMULA: DD COD = SCOD Ultrasonic - SCOD 0 SCOD NaOH - SCOD 0 × 100 % where SCOD_Ultrasonic: the COD in the supernatant of the sonicated sample (mg/L); SCOD_0: the COD in the supernatant of the original (un-pre-treated) sample (mg/L); SCOD_NaOH: the COD in the supernatant of the alkaline hydrolyzed sample (mg/L).

Specific Energy (SE) is a function of ultrasonic power, ultrasonic duration, and volume of sonicated sludge and TS concentration, and can be calculated using the following equation (Weemaes and Verstraete, 1998): FORMULA: SE = Pxt VxTS 0 where SE: the Specific Energy input in kW s/kg TS (kJ/kg TS); P: the ultrasonic power in kW; t: the ultrasonic duration in seconds; V: the volume of sonicated sludge in liters; TS _0: the total solids concentration in kg/L.


3 Results and discussions


3.1 Effect of sludge pre-treatment on sludge characteristics

The SCOD concentrations given in Table 3 indicate the effect of ultrasonic and microwave pre-treatments on the solubility of the sludge solids. The efficiency of the ultrasonic pre-treatment was evaluated in terms of percent Disintegration Degrees (DD%).

DD_COD values in Table 3 shows that the transport of COD from the particulate fraction to the soluble fraction was clearly enhanced by the application of both sludge pre-treatment techniques. SCOD substantially increased from 927 mg/L to 2082 mg/L by the application of 15,000 kJ/kg TS. The rate of SCOD increase was much higher when the applied Specific Energy was 25,000 kJ/kg TS. For microwave pre-treated sludge, the SCOD of pre-treated sludge samples was greater than that of alkaline pre-treated sludge sample (SCOD_NaOH = 3020 mg/L), leading to Disintegration Degrees higher than 100%.

The particle size distributions of the sludge samples prior and after pre-treatment were measured in terms of cut-off diameters d _10, d _50, and d _90 in sludge that were subject to different energies and contact times (Table 4 ). In this table, d _10, d _50, and d _90 demonstrate 10%, 50%, and 90% of particles (in volume) having the diameter lower or equal to d _10, d _50, and d _90, respectively.

Verifying the disintegration effect, the particle sizes of the cells were reduced sharply after the application of ultrasonication (Table 4). The median diameter, d _50, decreased with time and there was about 69% and 81% decrease in the median diameter (d _50) for SE values of 15,000 kJ/kg TS and 25,000 kJ/kg TS, respectively.

For the particle size of 30 min microwave pre-treated sludge, the median diameter, d _50, was greater than un-pretreated sludge, indicating re-flocculation of the sludge particles. The size of the sludge samples increased gradually with increasing temperature as a result of high molecular motion and collisions among the sludge particles. This re-flocculation leading to aggregation of small particles into larger flocs was observed after 15-min microwave application. Similar results were also observed in recently conducted studies (Yu et al., 2010; Chang et al., 2011; Dogan and Sanin, 2009).

According to Yu and co-workers sludge flocs were repositories for water and broken into smaller fragments after a short reaction time. These smaller fragments can be re-flocculated into tighter particles with the help of flocculating agents to improve the dewaterability (Yu et al., 2010). Chang and coworkers observed a continuous increase in Capillary Suction Time (CST) with increasing reaction time which might be due to disruption of sludge flocks by MW irradiation leading to the release of intracellular and extracellular materials (Chang et al., 2011). Dogan and Sanin also reported that the CST values increased after both MW (600 W, 16 min) and alkaline (pH 10–12.5) treatment (Dogan and Sanin, 2009).


3.2 TS and VS removal

The pH and alkalinity values throughout the study were a good indicator of the metabolic status of an anaerobic degradation process. Initial pH values of the reactors were adjusted to around pH 7. The final pH values of the reactors were found to be 6.45 and 7.46. The initial and final alkalinity concentrations in the reactors ranged between 2000–3600 mg CaCO_3/L and 3200–6700 mg CaCO_3/L, respectively. It has been reported in literature that laboratory scale studies on mesophilic and thermophilic anaerobic organic waste digestion varied within a range of 2000–4000 mg/L partial alkalinity as being typical for properly operating digesters (Bouallagui et al., 2009). In this study, the initial alkalinity concentrations in the reactors were in the range of the given limits; while the final concentrations were slightly higher than this range. The highest alkalinity concentrations were obtained at the co-digested reactors. Since no external buffer source was added into the reactors, this increase in the final alkalinity concentrations was an advantage of sludge-olive pomace co-digestion.

Olive pomace and waste water sludge both contain organic nitrogen. If the reactor contents have high ammonium nitrogen concentrations at elevated pH ranges, free ammonia nitrogen is produced and it has inhibitory effects on the methanogens. NH^4+–N concentrations in the reactors were measured before and after the digestion. At the end of the digestion period, the free ammonia concentrations were found to be in a range of 15–37 mg/L which was much lower than the reported inhibitory levels in literature (Yenigun and Demirel, 2013). Agreeing with Hills and Roberts (1981) and Hashimoto (1983), the co-digestion provided a wide range of nutrients, increased the buffering capacity and balanced the carbon to nitrogen (C/N) ratio of the feedstock, thereby decreasing the risk of ammonia inhibition.

The efficiencies of anaerobic mono and co-digestions were evaluated in terms of organic removal, biogas production and pathogen reduction.

Initially, the Independent Sample t-Test was used to compare cumulative biogas production data of each parallel reactor sets (95% confidence level). According to the results, there was no statistically significant difference (p > 0.05) between the cumulative biogas productions in the parallel digesters. The obtained Pearson’s correlation (p) values were in the range of 0.924 and 0.988. These results indicated that the average of data obtained from parallel reactors could be accepted as the representative value.

It is clear that the reactors containing pre-treated wastewater sludges and co-substrate showed better performance in the removal of organic solids compared to ones containing un-pretreated sludges.

VS removal efficiencies of all reactors were in the range of 39.3–53.8%. The highest VS removal of 53.8% was obtained in reactor R7 having a mixture of olive pomace and 30 min microwave pre-treated wastewater sludge. On the other hand, the lowest removal efficiency of 39.3% was observed in reactor R3 including only the olive pomace. These findings were in accordance with the literature. Torres-Castillo and co-workers studied the anaerobic digestion of energy crops in batch processes and had VS reductions of 45–60% (Torres-Castillo et al., 1995). Accordingly, Edelmann et al. (2000) also stated that co-digestion of sludge with vegetable wastes accelerated the digestion process, as observed in this study (Edelmann et al., 2000).

The highest TS removal of 47.69% was also obtained in reactor R7. On the other hand, the lowest removal efficiency of 31.17% was observed in reactor R2 including only the un-pretreated wastewater sludge. The study conducted by Astals et al. (2013) on the anaerobic digestion to seven mixed un-pretreated sewage sludge from different wastewater treatment plants demonstrated quite similar results and achieved 34% TS removal (Astals et al., 2013).


3.3 Stabilization

The results of the microbiological studies presented in Table 5 showed that the anaerobic digestion process ensured an efficient stabilization in all of the reactors. The mesophilic anaerobic mono and co-digestion of wastewater sludges and olive pomace had substantially inactivated the pathogens and succeeded 5-log reduction in the number of fecal coliforms while achieving 4-log reduction in the total coliform populations. Similarly, the fecal coliform contents at the end of the digestion period were almost negligible.


3.4 Biogas production results

The mono and co-digestion experiments were performed in duplicate batch anaerobic reactors. The evaluation of data was based on the average value obtained from the duplicate reactors. The cumulative biogas production data were presented in Fig. 1 .

Fig. 1 shows that the co-digestion of wastewater sludge and olive pomace (R4) improved the methane productions compared to mono digestion of these substrates (R2 and R3). The co-digestion established an appropriate carbon to nitrogen ratio (C/N) by mixing nutrient- and carbon-rich wastes as stated in Wang and co-workers study (Wang et al., 2012).

Mata-Alvarez et al. (2000) stated that the positive synergistic effects observed in co-digestion, due to the balancing of C/N ratio and several parameters in the co-substrate mixture, may offer potential for higher methane yields. This study revealed that the methane yields can be further increased by the application of appropriate sludge pre-treatment.

The statistical comparison of the reactors was done by the determination of rational differences between the measurements of parameters in the parallel reactors.

With this approach, the mono digestion and co-digestion/pre-treatment reactors appeared to be in two different clusters confirming the effect of co-digestion and pre-treatment.

The first group including reactors R1, R2 and R3 and the second group having reactors R5, R6 and R7 followed the similar gas production pattern. However, Reactor R4 followed the same trend with the first group at the beginning, but shifted into second group after the 8th day of digestion, indicating the positive effect of co-digestion itself.

The analysis also showed that retention time of 30 days was adequate to observe the targeted synergistic effect of co-digestion and sludge pre-treatment. For further studies, 20 day of digestion was found appropriate for the first group reactors (R1, R2 and R3) since there was no significant change after 18th day of digestion in gas production.

However, the retention time should not be selected less than 30 days for the second group of reactors, since the above mentioned stable conditions were observed after the 20th day of digestion.

In this study, the primary aim of ultrasonication and microwave pre-treatments was to increase the solubility of sludge solids and enhance the biogas production in the reactors. The results revealed that the application of ultrasonic and microwave pre-treatments to the sludge samples led to an additional increase in the cumulative biogas productions and methane yields. The improvement in the biogas production was clearly seen even from the very initial stage of the anaerobic digestion (from 1 to 4 days) as shown in Fig. 1.

Table 6 presents the main performance parameters of the batch mesophilic anaerobic digesters.

The specific methane yields obtained from mono-digestions of olive pomace and wastewater sludges were 0.18 and 0.16 L CH_4/g VS_added, respectively. Whereas, the co-digestion of wastewater sludge and olive pomace (R4) yielded 0.21 L CH_4/g VS_added. It is noticeable that applied co-digestion led to 17–31% increase in specific methane yields compared to mono-digestions of olive pomace and wastewater sludges, respectively.

The ultrasonic and microwave pre-treatments applied to the sludge samples prior to co-digestion process caused to the disruption of the sludge cells and enhanced the methane yields by 24% and 52%, respectively, compared to co-digestion with un-pretreated wastewater sludge.

The highest improvement in methane yield was obtained in reactor R7 co-digesting microwave pre-treated sludge and olive pomace. The methane yield in reactor R4 has increased to above 0.32 L CH_4/g VS_added when the sludge was pre-treated with microwave as in reactor R7.

The obtained methane yields due to the effect of the co-digestion/pre-treatment were in accordance with the values reported in the literature (Bardia et al., 1996; Bouallagui et al., 2009; Cesaro and Belgiorno, 2013; Kaparaju et al., 2002; Lehtomäki, 2006; Lissens et al., 2003; Parawira et al., 2004; Quiroga et al., 2014; Verrier et al., 1987; Weiland, 2003).

Quiroga et al. (2014) conducted a study on the effect of ultrasound pre-treatment application when co-digesting mixtures of manure with food waste and sewage sludge. With respect to the un-pretreated sludge, 15–31% increase was achieved at the specific methane yields at the end of 20 and 18 days of digestions, respectively.

Parawira et al. (2004) reported that co-digestion of potato waste with sugar beet leaves improved the accumulated methane production and improved the methane yield by 31% compared with digestion of potato waste alone.

Bouallagui et al. (2009) stated that compared to methane yield for the pure fruit and vegetable wastes (FVW), co-digestions of FVW with waste activated sludge enhanced the biogas yield by 43.8%. The addition of co-substrates such as abattoir waste water and activated sludge to fruit and vegetable waste can enhance biogas production up to 52%.

Cesaro and Belgiorno (2013) studied the efficiency of sonolysis and ozonation in improving anaerobic biodegradability of source sorted organic fraction of municipal solid waste. They reported that pre-treatments improved the solubilization of organic solid waste, however ultrasonication was more efficient than ozonation and cause to a 24% higher methane yield.

Bardia et al. (1996) have achieved a methane production of 0.29 m^3/kg VS from the digestion of the organic fraction of pineapple waste whilst Verrier et al. (1987) reported that the digestion of a fruit and vegetable mixture yielded 0.36 m^3 CH^4/kg VS in the mesophilic range.

The composition of the biogas (CO_2% and CH_4%) in an anaerobic system is related to the amount of stabilized biodegradable organic matter and the activity of the methanogens in the reactor. In the present work, methane contents of the reactors ranged between 61% and 69% of the total biogas produced. These values were in accordance with the typical methane yields of 60–80% reported in literature (Ponsá et al., 2011; Rao et al., 2008).


4 Conclusions

This study investigated the enhancement of biogas production through the application of ultrasonic and microwave pre-treatment in anaerobic co-digestion of olive pomace and wastewater sludges. The overall results showed that use of co-digestion and appropriate sludge pre-treatments together resulted in improved balance of nutrients, efficient pathogen and organic removals and higher methane yields compared to mono-digestions of these substrates.

Co-digestion yielded 0.21 L CH_4/g VS_added, whereas the maximum yields from mono-digestions of olive pomace and wastewater sludges were 0.18 and 0.16 L CH_4/g VS_added, respectively. The applied co-digestion led to 17–31% increase in methane production.

The ultrasonic and microwave sludge pre-treatments to improve the methane yields by 24% and 52%, respectively, compared to co-digestion with un-pretreated wastewater sludge. The highest yields were obtained in reactor R7 containing 30 min microwave pre-treated wastewater sludge as 0.46 L biogas/g VS_added and 0.32 L CH_4/g VS_added, respectively.

It was noteworthy that olive pomace and wastewater sludge are potential substrates for anaerobic digestion in the production of biogas. In addition to the improved biogas generation, the co-digestion of these substrates seemed to generate an energy efficient alternative solution for the disposal of agricultural product residuals and the wastewater sludges.