TITLE: Surfactant assisted microwave disintegration of green marine macroalgae for enhanced anaerobic biodegradability and biomethane recovery


1 Introduction

Green marine macroalgae (GMM) substrates have achieved greater attention of 3rd generation source of biogas production [1]. They are eminently applicable for biofuel productions due to their rich intracellular components like proteins, carbohydrates and bioactive fragments which are important chemical compounds for the bio based economy [2]. Marine macroalgae do not need cultivable terrain for their production and do not contend with food plants and has rapid growth rates as well as substrate yields [3]. In recent years, GMM have been applied in various fields: macroalgae such as kelp and gelidium, mostly cultivated for food products [4]; bio-fixation of carbon compounds and a renewable source of biomass producing valuable substances such as agar, alcohols and various volatile organic compounds [5]; removal of nutrients more effectively in wastewater treatment to avoid toxic substances produced from eutropication and also used as an adsorption and removal of ammonium [6]; biofuel generation like biomethane, biohydrogen and biomethanol [7]. Energy demands and ecological imbalance needs the evolution of alternative renewable energy fuel. Methane possess huge capacity for its richness in energy content, harmless combustion substance and easy shipment [8]. GMM have been recognized as potential substrates and they mitigate carbon during the production of useful products such as biofuels [9,10]. Nonetheless, there are some difficulties in using GMM as feedstocks for biomethane generation. Although, GMM owns much simpler cell structure than lignocellulosic biomasses due to the presence of polymers and thickness in cell walls gives more limitation for its solid cell structural strength [11].

Anaerobic Digestion (AD) is the technique for degradation of complex organic compounds into renewable energy (biogas) without oxygen free environment in the presence of microbes. In AD: hydrolysis (breakdown of solid compounds into soluble substances), acidogenesis (volatile fatty acids (VFA) production), acetogenesis (conversion of VFA into acetic acids, H_2 and CO_2) and methanogenesis (conversion of H_2 and acetic acid into methane and CO_2). AD varies greatly and mainly depends on multiple variables like solids concentration of substrates and intracellular components (proteins, carbohydrates and lipids). These variables was efficiently converted by the fermentative bacteria and leads to more VFA production [12,13]. Among the above, hydrolysis is the constrain step and it may consumes more time. To improve the liquefaction of GMM by biomethane produces. Pretreatment is the important path to release capsulated organic compound molecules to simple fragments. Different types of pretreatment techniques have been reported to improve the liquefaction of organic compounds from GMM such as mechanical [14], chemical [15], physical [16] and biological [17]. Microwave pretreatment (MP) is the better option to enhance the substrate lysis rate for subsequent AD process. Microwave condition produced by an electromagnetic field. This heating mechanism gives direct relationship with substrates and heat [18]. Microwave irradiation can hasten the substrate lysis rate, produce higher biomethane yields [19]. Dinesh Kumar et al., [20] reported that microwave irradiation has been more effective in the production for algal biomass has been more effective in the production of biohydrogen. Even though MP of marine macroalgal biomass is worthwhile; it has some disadvantages as more input energy required due to more liquefaction time [21]. High input energy required for MP can be reduced by coupling other methods. Sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS) is a powerful surface active medium higher liquefying properties [22]. Therefore, in this investigation, a new effort was done by combining microwave with surfactant for pretreating green marine macroalgal inorder to decrease the energy demand of microwave pretreatment and to achieve greater liquefaction for increased biomethane yield. Since, none of the report has been identified the effect of using SDBS combined with microwave as a pretreatment technique for GMM, This is the first investigation to document the potential of surfactant assisted microwave pretreatment of green marine macroalgal biomass on improved biomethane generation. The objective of this current work is to investigate the liquefaction efficiency of microwave pretreatment in detail, to assess the effect of various surfactant doses at fixed. Microwave specific energy on biopolymers release. Finally, to evaluate the effectiveness of this coupled pretreatment on anaerobic biodegradability and biomethane production.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Algal biomass

Fresh kelp (Chaetomorpha antennina) was collected from tuticorin (Tamil Nadu, India). The collected kelp was cleaned by clear water for 3 times to eliminate the impurities on the surface and shade dried at room temperature (35 °C) for 2 days. Further, the dried samples were spliced into small sizes (less than 2 cm). The minimization of sample size improves the surface area and effective disintegration of the GMM. Characteristics of C. antennina are as follows: carbon − 30.5 (% dry wt), hydrogen − 7 (% dry wt), nitrogen − 4 (% dry wt), protein − 5.5 (% dry wt), carbohydrate − 19 (% dry wt), lipid − 3 (% dry wt), cellulose − 5 (% dry wt), hemicellulose − 3 (% dry wt) and volatile solids − 72 (% dry wt). The carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen have been estimated by an elemental analyzer (Exeter Analytical CE 440, UK). The protein concentration was analyzed by lowry’s method [23]. Concentration of carbohydrates was analyzed by anthrone method [24] and the lipid concentration was determined by using blingh-dyer method [25]. Volatile solids was analyzed by the mass reduced between 105 and 550 °C.


2.2 Pretreatment


2.2.1 Microwave pretreatment (MP)

Microwave pretreatment (MP) was used to liquefy the GMM. Microwave oven (IFB-30SC2, India) was used for the liquefaction, the higher power and frequency were 900 W and 2450 MHz respectively. Pretreatment was performed in polytetra fluoro ethylene sealed container with capacity of 500 mL. The substrate and water ratio taken for the experiments were 1:50. It can be performed at different microwave power and treatment time were 90 W−720 W and 1–60 min, respectively.


2.2.2 Surfactant microwave pretreatment (SMP)

The SMP was carried out with 1:50 ratio of GMM and water were taken in 500 mL container and subjected to different SDBS concentration from 0.005 to 0.5 g/g TS at an optimal MP conditions. At regular intervals, the pretreated GMM samples were collected and analyzed.


2.3 Hydrolysis and acidogenesis study

Hydrolysis and acidogenesis study was conducted to investigate the result of without pretreated (control), microwave pretreated (MP), surfactant microwave pretreated (SMP) biomasses on fermentation based on the procedure elaborated by Tamilarasan et al., [26]. The study was carried out with pretreated samples and sludge from anaerobic digester (inoculum) were placed in each bottles (250 mL working volume) at 9:1 proportion. The samples were thermally treated at 102 °C at half an hour to restraint the methanogenic microbes. Then pinch of 2 - bromoethyl sulfonic acid (BESA) was introduced in each bottles. Finally, to eliminate the small indefinite amount of oxygen from the bottles, N_2 was passed and were kept in the digital IKA KS130 orbital shaker at 110 rpm at 35 °C for 72 h. the fermentation study were conducted in triplicate. The inoculum characteristics were; pH – 7.3, total solids (TS) – 20,200 ± 350 mg/L, volatile solid (VS) – 9,800 ± 250 mg/L, total chemical oxygen demand (TCOD) – 15,000 ± 400 mg/L, soluble chemical oxygen demand (SCOD) − 430 ± 50 mg/L.


2.4 Biochemical methane potential (BMP) study

A biochemical methane potential study was done to evaluate the ability of control, MP and SMP pretreated GMM samples on biomethane production as per the study of Ushani et al., [27]. The BMP study was done in 2L bottles. The rumen fluid (inoculum) and GMM samples were taken in the bottles at 3:1 ratio. The inoculum characteristics were VS − 10,000 ± 300 mg/L, SCOD – 370 ± 50 mg/L, TCOD − 14,600 ± 350 mg/L. The biogas content was calculated via gas chromatograph with a thermal conductivity detector and porapak Q column with a specification of length − 2 cm, diameter − 3.25 mm, size − 80/100 mesh (Model No, G1311C, 1260. Baroda). Helium gas was used as carrier. The temperature of the injector, column and detector were 150, 35 and 260 °C, respectively. An exponential first-order kinetics has been applied to fit the specific biomethane generation [28]. FORMULA: M t = M fd × ( 1 - e kt ) where M(t) = specific methane yield (g COD/g COD)

M(fd) = conversion of soluble organics to methane (g COD/g COD)

K = hydrolysis constant (day^−1)

t = digestion time (days).

The model was carried out through MATLAB version 2012a. Parameters with 95% confidence were derived based on Kavitha et al. [29].


2.5 Analytical methods

TCOD, SCOD, TS and Volatile fatty acid (VFA) were estimated following protocols enlisted in the standard methods [30].


2.6 Statistical analysis

The significance of the experiments was checked by one-way ANOVA analysis. (α = 0.05), in order to calculate the significance difference between the values statistically.


2.7 Energy analysis

The energy estimation was assessed through evaluation of specific energy spent for microwave pretreatment and the improvement in biomethane production for pretreated C. antennina. The microwave specific energy was evaluated using the following equation. FORMULA: Em = P × T / V × Ts where; Em = microwave specific energy (kJ/kg TS)

P = power needed for liquefaction (Watts)

T = irradiation time (sec)

V = volume of substrates (L)

T_s = total solids in substrate (g Ts/L).


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Microwave pretreatment (MP)

The MP technique was known for its potency interms of soluble organic release and liquefaction [31]. In this part, the potency of the MP technique is assessed based on soluble organics release and power consumption interms of specific energy (SE).


3.1.1 Impact of microwave pretreatment (MP) on soluble organics release

Pretreatment of Chaetomorpha antennina was performed by microwave at different power level from 90 to 720 W with the treatment time of 1–60 mins. Fig. 1 describes the effect of microwave (power and pretreatment timeon soluble organic release. Effect of thermal is the most significant phenomena in MP. Thermal impact enhances the temperature as well as pressure and improves the green marine macroalgae (GMM) disintegration and also helpful for enzymatic hydrolysis. In addition with thermal effect, athermal (without thermal) conditions also supports for betterment of GMM disintegration. Athermal situation occurs when the changing electric field of microwaves is adequate to influence the complex cell wall of the solids substances to remove their hydrogen bonds and modify their texture. Magnetic field combining the breakdown of substrates by dielectric reaction and electro permeabilization liable for disintegrating the substrates via microwave [32]. From the figure, it was evidently noted that the soluble organic release could be divided into two zones: an active disintegration zone (0–15 min) and a passive disintegration zone (15–60 min). A same SCOD release trend was reported by many researchers [19,28] during microwave assisted pretreatment of waste biomass. The release of soluble organics increased as MP time increased. A rapid release was observed by increasing the treatment time to 15 min. Beyond the treatment time of 15 min recorded in a degradation manner and it may due to the degradation of soluble organics via evaporation [31]. This information shows that almost maximum organics were discharged within 15 min. Based on the above MP time of 15 min was noted to be optimum. Eswari et al., [28] concluded that microwave input power may acts as an important role in SCOD release. From the figure, the release pattern was insignificant (950–1073 mg/L) for the microwave input power ranges from 90−360 W may be due to partial disintegration of the GMM [33] which shows that the power ranges from 90−360 W was unable to induce more liquefaction of GMM. Hence, the microwave power ranges from 90−360 W was not taken into account for further studies. When the input power of the microwave increases from 360−450 W, there was a remarkable release in soluble organics (1260 mg/L), perhaps due to the thermal along with a thermal effect cleave the cell walls of the GMM by the strong electroporation during MP conditions [11]. Increasing the input power more than 450 W does not produce any rapid increment in soluble organics release. At the highest input power 720 W, the soluble organics release was recorded only 1370 mg/L. The input power from 420 to 720 W recorded only a minimal release in soluble organics (1260–1370 mg/L) and hence can be rejected. Table 1 shows the SCOD release of GMM during MP were statistically checked for significance via anova. For the power input from 90 to 360 W, the p value was calculated to be 0.77 implying no considerable variation statistically. For power input ranges from 360 to 450 W, the variations in the mean values are higher than would be expected; there was a considerable variations with a p below 0.05 and it was noted as 0.038. Comparing the mean values of SCOD release from 450 to 720 W indicates, no significant difference between them, with probability greater than 0.05 and it was noted as 0.86. Given the above outcomes, a pretreatment time of 15 min at 450 W was concluded as optimum for the MP process.


3.1.2 Impact of microwave specific energy (MSE) on liquefaction

Fig. 2 depicts the divergency of liquefaction in regard to MSE during MP process. In any thermal pretreatment, power (watts) is the pretreatment parameter that expresses the energy input. The figure reveals that liquefaction increases when MSE increases. A same kind of correlation between microwave specific energy and macroalgal liquefaction was documented by Dinesh Kumar et al., [20]. The liquefaction pattern can be categorized into three steps, M_1, M_2 and M_3. Step M_1 stands for passive liquefaction, which corresponds to power 90–360 W. Step M_2 stands for active liquefaction, which corresponds from 360−450 W. At last, step M_3 extends from 540−720 W. During step M_1, a liquefaction of about 10.2–11.5% was recorded at a microwave specific energy (MSE) input of 4050–16200 kg/kg TS. The liquefaction achieved was minimal and it can be omitted for further experiments. In step M_2, a potential increment was noted in liquefaction, a maximum of 13.5% was recorded at a MSE of 20250 kJ/kg TS at a microwave power 450 W. The greater soluble organics release can be attributed to the fact that microwave thermal effect disintegrate the non-biodegradable compounds in the substrates and converted them into simpler biodegradable compounds [34]. Step M_3 produced no rapid path in liquefaction, even though the microwave power and MSE were increased from 450 to 720 W and 20250–32400 kJ/kg TS. For example, liquefaction increased from 13.5−14.7% needs a MSE of 32400 kJ/kg TS. Therefore, it could be confirmed that minor increasing of microwave power leads to wastage of input energy during the MP. Instead, a MSE of 20250 kJ/kg TS was concluded as an optimum for MP.


3.2 Surfactant microwave pretreatment (SMP)

Surfactant microwave pretreatment (SMP) was expected to enhance the SCOD, biopolymers release, hydrolysis and biomethane production.


3.2.1 Impact of smp on scod and biopolymers release

SDBS is a powerful anionic surfactant that lessen the interfacial surface tension of the liquid phase [35]. The efficiency of microwave thermal effect can be improved by lowering the interfacial surface tension of liquid phase. Consider all the above factors in the current study SDBS was combined with microwave to enhance liquefaction. The impact of SMP on SCOD and biopolymers release is portrayed in Fig. 3 which indicates that the trend of soluble organic release and liquefaction shows disparate phases: an active and a passive release phases. The active release phase starts from a SDBS dosage of 0.005–0.04 g/g TS. The passive release phase arises from SDBS dosage of 0.07–0.5 g/g TS. In the active phase, SCOD and liquefaction rises gradually upto the SDBS dosage of 0.04 g/g TS. From this dosage, the SCOD release and liquefaction were monitored to be 1800 mg/L and 19.2% respectively. The above outcome were relatively similar with the research document by Karray et al., [36] and they observed significant release of intracellular component such as protein and carbohydrates during microwave pretreatment of algal biomass. In the passive release phase, the SCOD (1950 mg/L) and liquefaction (21%) were insignificant. Based on the above findings, there may be a harmonious impact during SMP if the performance of microwave thermal effect was improved by SDBS leading to enhanced liquefaction.

Biopolymers such as protein, carbohydrates and lipids are the main intracellular components of GMM [37]. Greater availability of these intracellular components in the medium improve the efficiency of biomethane production [4]. Fig. 3 shows the impact of SMP on biopolymers release. The release trend of biopolymers travel the same pattern as that of SCOD. Apparently, the release pattern of biopolymer has been divided into two different phases: an active and a passive release phase. The active release phase of biopolymers occurs at on SDBS dosage of 0.005–0.4 g/g TS. The passive release phase starts from the dosage of 0.07–0.5 g/g TS. In the active phase, release trend of biopolymers gradually with the increase in SDBS dosage upto 0.04 g/g TS at this concentration protein, carbohydrates and lipids release were 850 mg/L, 430 mg/L and 240 mg/L respectively. The noticed trend was aimed to collapse the complex organic substrates by means of surfactant, and destruction led to the release of intracellular compounds. These compounds are known to be rich in organic contents, which enhance the SCOD release [38,39]. Further increase in SDBS dosage, there was no notable improvement in biopolymer release. The biopolymer release in the active phase was associated to a synergistic impact of the SMP process, which provides the path for enhanced disintegration of GMM. These outcomes contravene the results of Dinesh Kumar et al., [20] who achieved 1850 mg/L and 950 mg/L of protein and carbohydrates during microwave coupled acidic disintegration of ulva reticulata. Achiveing GMM liquefaction in excess of 10% was not possible with only mechanical pretreatment [25]. In addition, merely increasing the specific energy and pretreatment time causes loss of organics rather than liquefaction. This makes the pretreatment techniques useless and uneconomical. In this study, surfactant combined with microwave significantly enhance the liquefaction to more than 19%. This combined pretreatment could minimize the specific energy input and loss of organics associated with MP of GMM. Nevertheless, in the current study the recorded protein and carbohydrate release was comparably minimal because this biopolymers release by pretreatment mainly depends on the type of species, composition and the impact of disintegration method varies with the different macroalgal substrates [40].


3.3 Effect of MP and SMP on bioacidification study

In the anaerobic biodegradation phase, the predominant organic biopolymer components like proteins are disintegrated into peptides and amino acids whereas carbohydrates are hydrolyzed into sugar molecules by hydrolytic exo enzymes [41]. During this fermentative phase, the developed organic compounds get converted into volatile fatty acids (VFA) by the acetogenesis. In addition, that the consumption of biopolymers and higher generation of VFA, shows enhanced biodegradability and biomethane generation. The higher VFA production of the pretreated substrate in this bioacidification leads to disintegrate rapidly and produce more methane when compared to the non-pretreated (control) substrate generates low VFA [19].

Fig. 4 indicates the effect of MP and SMP on bioacidogenesis study. In the control, the protein (105–190 mg/L) and carbohydrates (20–60 mg/L) has been increased which depicts the supremacy of hydrolysis over fermentation. But in MP sample, the proteins (430–190 mg/L) and carbohydrates (190–30 mg/L) were reduced when increases the fermentation time from 0 − 72 h. Identical release was perceived for proteins (850–100 mg/L) and carbohydrates (430–40 mg/L) in SMP. During the termination of fermentation period, the protein and carbohydrate level in both MP and SMP sample reveals potential utilization of solubilized organics by fermentative microbes. In addition, the essential parameter to be observed at the acidification phase is the generation of VFAs. The efficiency of the pretreatment was found by the production of VFA [42]. In SMP, the VFA production (730 mg/L) was found to be higher than MP (345 mg/L) and control (50 mg/L). The greater VFA production in SMP was mostly attributable to effective consumption and the transformation of the soluble organic components via acetogenic microbes. Based on the above outcomes, the SMP process can improve the acidification more potential than MP.


3.4 Effect of MP and SMP on biomethane potential study

The outcome of the methane yield for control, MP and SMP samples and the modeled data are portrayed in Fig. 5a . Many of the researchers indicated that the release of organics was correlated with biomethane production [18,19]. The higher release of organics due to effective pretreatment make ease the amenability of substrates to the methanogenic microbes and enhances the methane production. The graph indicates that the methane production was very minimal at the starting and terminal of the substrate degradation steps which are associated with the methanogenesis growth. At the earlier digestion time of 5 day, the biomethane production of the MP, SMP and control (0.117, 0.062 and 0.018 g COD/ g COD) was observed to be delay. It may cause by the environment adaptation of methanogenesis. After end of acclimatization period, the methane generation commence to increase significantly for the biodegradation period upto 15 days. SMP sample produced more biomethane (0.21 g COD/g COD) than MP (0.12 g COD/g COD). This increased because of the release of higher liquefiable matter by hydrolysis and anaerobic bacteria, more VFA production by acetogenesis which helps to improve the methane generation. In control sample, the recorded methane yield was very negligible amount (0.029 g COD/g COD). This may be due to the solid cell structure of biopolymers which needs more duration for biodegradation. Absolutely, the methane production was recorded to be maintained beyond the degradation period of 25 days, due to deficiency of substrates [36]. The kinetic parameters of methane production efficiency was performed by first-order model and summarized in Table 2 . The correlation coefficient (R^2) were noted to be within 0.98–0.99. This R^2 value denotes apt fit of original value with that of modeled value. Fig. 5b represents the plots between substrate biodegradability and hydrolysis constant of the untreated, MP and SMP samples. From the figure, the control sample has a large confidence zone and minimal biodegradability 0.02 g COD/g COD. The SMP and MP samples have lower confidence zone and higher biodegradability (0.205 and 0.12 g COD/g COD). The outcome exposed that SMP indicates enhanced biodegradability and methane generation than MP and control. Table 3 shows the comparisons of biomethane production from GMM through various pretreatment techniques.


3.5 Economic analysis

A simple economic analysis must be done in order to accomplish the viability of disintegration process. On the basis of the data achieved in experimentation, an economic analysis was performed for MP and SMP samples. In economic analysis, the capital cost required for necessary for GMM pretreatments were not considered in the present study. For analysis COD liquefaction of 15% was employed as an index to calculated the cost (input energy in which MP and SMP similar percentage of liquefaction was employed as factor of index to calculate the cost). Amount spent towards electrical energy demand during MP and SMP was calculated as per the methodology described in Rajesh Banu et al (2018). The chemical (SDBS) cost was taken into account in addition to electrical energy in SMP. The amount estimated for SMP was calculated as 1.30 USD/kg TS and it was comparatively lesser than MP (2.07 USD/kg TS). A net savings of nearly 37.19% was achieved by SMP when compared to MP. Hence SMP was economically feasible than MP.


4 Conclusion

Surfactant microwave pretreatment (SMP) of marine macroalgae (C. antennina) was identified as a probable feedstocks for methane production. A microwave specific energy of 20250 kJ/ kg TS, a surfactant dosage of 0.04 g/g TS and a pretreatment time of 15 min was investigated ideal for SMP. SMP indicates a higher liquefaction rate of 19.5%. The results of the anaerobic fermentation and biomethane potential study indicates the greater VFA and biomethane generation in SMP than MP.


 CRediT authorship contribution statement

J. Rajesh Banu: Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervision. K. Tamilarasan: Writing - original draft. Soon Woong Chang: Data curation, Resources. D. Duc Nguyen: Data curation, Resources. Vinoth kumar Ponnusamy: Data curation, Resources. Gopalakrishnan Kumar: Methodology, Resources.