TITLE: TiO2 - chitosan thin film induced solar photocatalytic deflocculation of sludge for profitable bacterial pretreatment and biofuel production


1 Introduction

In recent times, the wastewater treatment sectors emancipate waste activated sludge (WAS) which need effectual treatment prior to disposal due to the existence of high harmful pathogens, organic chemicals and other inorganic inert substances [1]. Improper disposal of organic-rich WAS leads to health effects, pollution and contamination to the bionetwork. Sludge management is tedious and expensive since it consumes 60% operational cost of overall wastewater treatment plant and faces constraints due to strict law [2,3]. Hence, energy and cost-efficient anaerobic digestion process meets the energy demand and enriches the solid reduction for safe disposal of organic WAS.

The bioenergy production from WAS is deemed as an essential process intent to recycle, reduce and reuse of available high suspended and bio-accumulated organics [4]. Even though anaerobic degradation of sludge has gained more attention during the past decades but its potency is limited due to inefficient lengthy hydrolysis step. This devours digestion time due to complex floc structure that impedes higher organic utilization for proficient methane yield [5]. To intensify the hydrolysis process and methane yield, several disintegration options of WAS such as mechanical, bacterial, physical, chemical and integrated disintegration methods have been developed and implemented so far [6]. Of these, bacterial disintegration is an ecologically safe method to persuade efficient solubilisation without any hazardous substances formation. In the bacterial disintegration, the extracellular polymeric substance (EPS) of sludge hinders the available nutrient to microbes [7]. EPS protects the microbial aggregates in the sludge to prevent cell rupture and lysis. Therefore, deflocculation process, an EPS removal technique that helps to weaken the microbial aggregates for promoting floc disruption and exposes the microbial cell for bacterial disintegration [8].

Deflocculation techniques employed in WAS are chemical (alkaline chemicals, cation binding agents and AOP chemicals), physical (Thermal and ultrasonication) and mechanical (disperser) method. The chemical method of deflocculation is preferred mostly owing to its effective extrication of exopolymer within short time duration The chemical method utilizes alkaline chemical such as NaOH, KOH, NaCl, CaCl_2 etc., cation binding agents such as sodium citrate, citric acid etc., and AOP chemicals such as TiO_2, Fenton, H_2O_2 etc., and various other chemicals [9]. Advanced oxidation using photocatalysis is a high potent eco-remediation process that involved in organic pollutants deterioration. It also disintegrates and deflocculates the microbial activity of sludge and aids in digestion. This green technique makes use of certain metal oxides as photocatalyst namely: CuO, SiO_2, TiO_2, ZnO, etc., to perform deflocculation process [10]. Among these photocatalysts, TiO_2 holds high potency with good photo-oxidation property and offers less cost and photo-induced non-toxic organic degradation [11]. On illuminating this TiO_2 to solar radiation, the valence band electrons shifted to the conduction band and result in the creation of energized holes. Then, this energized hole reacts with water or hydroxyl ion, which leads to the formation of hydroxyl radicals. This high oxidative hydroxyl radical involved in the decomposition of the sludge [12]. Usage of suspended photocatalyst for sludge treatment has certain drawbacks such as catalyst aggregation, catalytic slurry formation and inherent cost for separation of catalyst from the sludge. In addition, suspended photocatalyst induces sludge turbidity and causes light shadowing effect that becomes an obstacle for photocatalytic activity [13]. These drawbacks pressurize the suspended photocatalysts as an inadequate substance for sludge remediation. To overcome this limitation, photocatalytic immobilization on fixed support as thin film and impregnation of photocatalyst on solid matrix came into existence to improve photocatalyst performance. Certain research reports regarding the utilization of the immobilized photocatalysts include the TiO_2 deposited on circulating bed photocatalytic reactor for sludge pretreatment [14], Pretreatment of sludge using Ag/TiO_2 coated photocatalytic reactor [15], and the MoS_2/Ag/TiO_2 coated nanocomposite photocatalytic film for efficient disintegration of organics [16]. Most recently, impregnating photocatalyst on polymeric substances are widely used to form nanocomposite film that exhibits multifunctional behavior. This nanocomposite film effectually inhibits photocatalytic adherence with recoverability, reusability and compatibility. Herein present investigation, an effort to disperse sludge aggregates using TiO_2/chitosan nanocomposite thin film (TCTF) was made. The researchers has not documented any report of TCTF usage in sludge deflocculation until now. The main objective of the study are (i) impregnation of TiO_2 on the chitosan to form TCTF for effective photocatalytic activity, (ii) to evaluate the proficiency of TCTF in sludge deflocculation, with negligible microbial stress, (iii) to assess the potency of TCTF on enzyme secreting bacterial disintegration, (iv) to predict the impact of TCTF mediated enzyme secreting bacterial disintegration on biomethane generation (v) to predict the commercial viability of the proposed sludge management method on large scale.


2 Experimentation


2.1 Sampling of sludge

Municipal wastewater treatment plant situated in Trivandrum, Kerala produces a large amount of Municipal Waste Activated Sludge (WAS). This WAS was sampled from the recirculation line of secondary sedimentation tank. To hinder bacterial activity, the sampled WAS was preserved in the laboratory at 4 °C. The physicochemical characteristics of WAS were analysed and was tabulated in Table 1 .


2.2 Exopolymer (EPS) extraction protocol using TiO 2  (in suspension)

Solar photocatalytic process using TiO_2 (in suspension) was performed in 7 similar glass trays. To this each tray, 300 mL of sludge was taken and different dosages of TiO_2 (0.01 to 0.1 g/g SS) was added to each tray. These trays were kept under the solar radiation. The samples were collected at a constant time of 15 min. The collected samples were centrifuged at 7500 rpm for 15 min. Then, supernatant is collected and analysed for the estimation of protein, carbohydrate and DNA to optimize the dosage of TiO_2.


2.3 TiO 2  embedded chitosan thin film (TCTF) preparation

The TCTF was formed based on the procedure of Senthil Kumar et al., [17]. A nanocomposite solution was prepared by the addition of commercial TiO_2 nanoparticles (optimized previously) into 1% of glacial acetic acid. The solution was mixed for about 10 min and then chitosan powder was added and mixed vigorously to attain the homogeneous form and then sonicated for 15mins. In the reaction mixture, 0.1 M NaOH was added until the pH reached 6.0. Then the homogeneous mixture was poured into a Petridish and was dried at room temperature. Further, the film was dried in an oven at 50 °C and subsequently dried film was peeled off from the petridish


2.4 Deflocculation using TCTF

A 300 mL of sludge was taken in a 1 L glass tray. Then the optimized dosage of TiO_2 embedded chitosan thin film (TCTF) was placed on the sludge and kept under the solar radiation for 1 h. The samples were collected at different intervals of time from the tray which ranges from 5 min to 60 min. Centrifugation of the collected samples was carried out at 7500 rpm for 15 min. The supernatants of the centrifuged samples were filtered and analysed for exopolymers to optimize the solar irradiation time for waste activated sludge deflocculation.


2.5 Enzyme secreting bacterial pretreatment

After deflocculatiion, 250 mL of conical flask was taken and utilized for performing enzyme secreting bacterial disintegration. The bacterium used in the study was Bacillus jerish 03 (Accession number: KC597266) and Bacillus jerish 04 (Accession number: KC597267) which was isolated and identified as per the earlier research [18]. Three conical flasks: control (200 mL of raw sludge), flocculated [raw sludge (200 mL) + bacteria (1 g dry cell weight/L)] and deflocculated [deflocculated sludge (200 mL) + bacteria (1 g dry cell weight/L)]. The experiment was carried out to assess the efficacy of this proposed disintegration. Incubation of whole sludge samples at 40 °C was done under constant mixing upto 42 h maintaining 6.5 pH. The sample were collected and periodic analysis of SS, SCOD and biopolymer release were done at regular time intervals.


2.6 Batch anaerobic assay

300 mL of serum bottle has been used for batch anaerobic test to calculate the bioenergy (methane) production which was executed in accordance with the method illustrated by [19]. These investigations were done in mesophilic condition (37 ± 1 °C). The evaluation of anaerobic biomethanation test was taken for all three samples (control flocculated and deflocculated sludge). The maintained inoculum and substrate ratio was 3:1. The inoculum used is bovine rumin fluid and the substrate used are sludge samples. In order to have better compliance and scare endogenous respiration, the inoculum must be active [20]. Proper measuring of methane production was done by the syringe and needle arrangement. A comparative study of the enhanced methane generation of different sludge samples were carried out. The kinetic study of methane generation was analysed by first-order kinetic model and the specific methane production rate was evaluated. Non-linear regression kinetic model was applied to investigate the bioenergy generation of all the samples which was given as follows:**** FORMULA: X t = Xd ∗ 1 - e - θ t } where X_t is the methane produced at time t (gCOD/gCOD added), Xd is the methane production potential (gCOD/g COD added)) and the constants ɵ is the hydrolysis constant. The modelling was performed in Matlab (2012a Version).


2.7 Analytical procedures

Using the standard methods [21], solid constituents such as suspended solids (SS) and total solids (TS) and along with organic contents such as total and soluble chemical oxygen demand (TCOD & SCOD) have been estimated. The summation of exopolymer elements contributes to the extractable EPS. The biopolymers (Protein, carbohydrate) and exoenzymes were explored based on the method of the researcher [2]. COD solubilization percentage or efficiency was predicted using Eq. (2). FORMULA: COD solubilization % = Soluble chemical oxygen demand / Total chemical oxygen demand × 100

The deflocculation degree is the point of maximum exopolymer removal from the sludge which was elucidated in Eq. (3) FORMULA: Deflocculation degree = Total soluble exopolymer / Total extractable exopolymer ∗ 100 where, FORMULA: Total extractable exopolymer = Summation of bound exopolymer i . e . , LB EPS + TB EPS


2.8 Energetic, solid and cost analysis

From the pilot-scale study, preliminary assessment of economic feasibility prior to the implementation of the proposed treatment process is mandatory [22]. The energy and cost analysis are focussed in this aspect to evaluate the efficiency of the proposed treatment using the experimental data obtained. Hence, about 1 ton of sludge was used for analysis. The input energy spent for the sludge treatment was pumping of the sludge, mechanical stirring utilized for deflocculation, pretreatment and anaerobic digestion. Table 2 details the parameters and assumed data during the proposed method of energetic, solid and cost analysis.


2.8.1 Energy analysis in the treatment process

Energy analysis includes the estimation of the energy that are contributed in the proposed treatment process and output energy. This energy analysis was performed based on the previous procedure in [23]. On deducting total energy applied from output energy generated, the net energy was obtained. The input energy spent for the sludge treatment was pumping of the sludge, mechanical stirring utilized for deflocculation, pretreatment and anaerobic digestion. Summation of input energy gives total energy applied which was determined by means of the following equation: FORMULA: TEa = Σ Deflocculation energy ; Pretreated energy ; digestion energy

The methane energy obtained as output which was determined as follows: FORMULA: Output energy O E = P methane ξ η V where, P_methane represents the rate of methane production (m^3CH_4/m^3day),ξ indicates lower calorific value of (KJ/m^3 methane), η specifies energy alteration efficacy (90%), V Represents the capacity of tank (m^3).

On deducting total energy applied from output energy generated, the net energy was obtained.


2.8.2 Mass balance

Mass balance analysis includes the detail exploration of the sludge that was reduced in the pretreatment as well as in the digestion process. Balancing the one ton of sludge (assumed) utilized for the proposed treatment process and left after the treatment. The net solid (suspended solid) disposal was estimated using the formula. FORMULA: NS = S t\; - S r FORMULA: NS = S S red % × S t where, NS = Net quantity of solid (TSS) persist after treatment for disposal (kg),S_t = Quantity of solids (TSS) present initially prior to treatment (kg), S_r = Quantity of solid (TSS) which was reduced in the treatment process (kg), SS_red (%) = Reduction in suspended solid concentration (%).


2.8.3 Cost balance

In cost analysis, the energy cost (EC) incurred during the implementing the treatment, utilized chemicals cost (CC), the cost that is to be spent for remained solid disposal, cost gained in solid reduction due to the proposed sludge management process were taken into consideration. In accordance with the research of Kavitha et al., [18] the cost required for one kWh of energy was $0.23 and correspondingly the cost incurred for per kg of solid was $ 0.28 for solid reduced and disposed. The cost of methane in the form of energy and reduced cost for sludge disposal (RSDC) in the treatment process was measured as a positive cost (gain). The cost spent for chemical utilization, cost of total energy applied for the treatment and cost of the solid remained after treatment for disposal was considered as negative cost (loss). The net profit (NP) was evaluated by deducting the loss from gain cost.


2.9 Statistical analysis

Entire analysis was executed in triplicate and attained output was revealed as a mean of three values. Student t test vs one way analysis of variance was preferred to assess the results significance. The results are thought to be statistically significant when the value of p < 0.05.


3 Result and discussion


3.1 Optimization of TiO 2  in suspension for film preparation

Prior to impregnation of photocatalyst (TiO_2) on chitosan solid matrix, the photocatalytic process performed using various suspended TiO_2 dosage (0.01 g/g SS to 0.1 g/g SS) to optimize its usage for preparing TCTF. From (Fig. 1a ), it was observed that the concentration of biopolymer release i.e., protein, carbohydrate and DNA augments gradually from 14.35 to 43.54 mg/L, 9.11 to 30.76 mg/L and 4.25 to 24.39 mg/L, respectively when the TiO_2 dosage was 0.05 g/g SS. This gradual increment illustrates the disruption of adhered microbial cell within the sludge which induces the release of exopolymers without any microbial stress [24]. DNA release confirmed the deflocculation process since the DNA release was minimal up to 0.05 g/g SS and hikes rapidly when the dosage increases beyond it. A tremendous increment of DNA from 55 mg/L to 104.40 mg/L up to the dosage of 0.1 g/g SS TiO_2 dosage. This explains the secretion of intracellular medium due to microbial lysis. The disruption of exopolymer without microbial lysis was a significant aspect during deflocculation process. This change of phase from deflocculation to disintegration was detailed in the figure by linear profile. The gradual linear increment indicates the deflocculation phase and rapid increment of biopolymer release indicates the disintegration phase. Hence, 0.05 g/g SS an optimal dosage effectively deflocculates the sludge and used for film preparation.


3.2 Deflocculation using TiO 2  embedded chitosan thin film (TCTF)

Exopolymer (EPS) exist in the sludge matrix was excreted by microbes during its period of growth. This double-layered exopolymer [(Loosely bound (Lb) and tightly bound (Tb) layer] promotes sludge stability and matrix structure by aggregation that can be large or dense [25]. This promotes firm floc structure. Loosely bound is the outermost layer, which diffuses through the tightly bound EPS. Microbial cell available in outer flocs structure entangled thinly to LB-EPS. Disruption of this exopolymer increases the bioavailability of microbial cell for further disintegration process [26]. In this study, TCTF effectively deflocculates the sludge exopolymers. The variation in the exopolymers subfractions (bound and extractable EPS), biopolymers, DNA and exoenzyme release assist in the determination of deflocculation efficacy of TCTF.


3.2.1 Variation in DNA release and exopolymer fraction

(Fig. 1b ) details the variation of exopolymer fractions using TCTF. The observed concentration of Lb and Tb in the raw sludge was 30.2 mg/L and 20.08 mg/L respectively. TCTF disperses the microbial cell and expels the exopolymers from the double-layered sludge floc structure to the aqueous phase. The extractable EPS was estimated to be 50.28 mg/L by summing the bound exopolymers. Bound EPS profile was distinguished into two phases of declination: positive decline and negative decline. The positive decline was from 0 to 50 min. In this declination, a rapid reduction in the bound EPS (Lb – 20 to 0.5 mg/L and Tb – 30 to 0 mg/L) was seen with the subsequent increment and decrement in extractable EPS. The increment in extractable EPS (6 mg/L to 50.07 mg/L) was found up to 25 min due to the release of exopolymers with corresponding increment in concentration of DNA from 6.54 mg/L to 24.41 mg/L. The maximum deflocculation efficiency of 99.35% was achieved at 25 min. Decreased extractable EPS indicates the degradation of exopolymeric substances and the corresponding DNA decrement from 19.17 mg/L to 0.42 mg/L at 50 min due to the complete degradation of released extracellular substances. When the time exceeds 50 min, the negative decline was seen in bound EPS. This specifies the solubilisation of particulate organics to aqueous phase for enhancing intracellular substance release. This could be evident from the extractable EPS and DNA variation from 40.45 mg/L to 98.67 mg/L and 25.70 mg/L to 65.64 mg/L, respectively. This sudden rise of DNA highlights the cell lysis. The effective disruption of microbial cell with any cell lysis could be seen at the duration of 25 min which is considered to be an optimum time for deflocculation.


3.2.2 Exoenzyme release

Exoenzyme release and its activity was assessed during deflocculation and its variation was elucidated in (Fig. 1b ). From the figure, the activities of exoenzyme increases from 0.02 U/mL to 0.44 U/mL (protease) and 0 U/mL to 0.38 U/mL (amylase) with the increment in treatment time upto 25 min. This signifies the release of entangled enzymes during floc disruption [20]. Beyond 25 min, enzyme activity decreased (protease- 0.38 to 0 U/mL and amylase- 0.36 to 0 U/mL) owing to the degradation of released exopolymers. However, a further sudden rise in the enzyme activity beyond 50 min indicates the abrupt release of intracellular enzyme due to cell lysis. Thus, deflocculation time of 25 min was optimal to promote better disruption of exopolymer.


3.3 TCTF mediated enzyme secreting bacterial disintegration

During sludge disintegration, the inoculated bacteria strain releases protease and amylase enzymes to induce biomass stress. This biomass stress promotes cell cleavage that causes solubilisation of particulate organic to aqueous phase. TCTF mediated bacterial disintegration enables easy accessibility of substrate to the microbes and surface area increment for better solubilisation. Time is the major parameter to enhance and achieve a better disintegration process. This study details the role of enzyme secreting bacterial disintegration in raw sludge and TCTF treated sludge.


3.3.1 SS reduction

SS reduction indicates the degradation of solid during the disintegration process. (Fig. 2a ) depicts the variation of SS concentration during disintegration process. The samples used for disintegration are controlled (raw sludge without any treatment), flocculated sludge (bacterial disintegration only) and deflocculated sludge (TCTF mediated enzyme secreting bacterial disintegration). (Fig. 2a ) elucidated that a hasty reduction of SS concentration from 4000 to 3914.58 mg/L, 3698.66 mg/L and 3500 mg/L in control, flocculated and deflocculated sludge due to the increment in disintegration time (from 0 to 42 h). The decrement in SS concentration promotes increment in SS reduction efficiency from 0 to 2.13%, 7.53% and 12.5%, respectively for control, flocculated and deflocculated sludge. This increment attributable to prompt intensification of hydrolytic activity causing solid biodegradability due to the release of enzymes from the inoculated bacterial strain. This pattern achieved in enzyme secreting bacterial disintegration for all samples was comparable but the solubilisation efficiency varies which was in accordance to the work of [26]. The relative analysis of flocculated and deflocculated sludge depicts that floc-disrupted sludge showed 5% higher SS reduction than flocculated sludge. Further, time increment causes the stabilization of SS reduction for all samples. The reason behind the stabilization is saturation of solubilisation by the inoculated bacteria because of complete substrate consumption. Hence, the disintegration time of 42 h is optimal for enzyme secreting bacterial disintegration. A significant difference in SS reduction between flocculated and deflocculated samples was analysed through a standard T test. The obtained p value was 0.0002 that was lesser than 0.05.


3.3.2 COD solubilization

(Fig. 2b ) explains the release of soluble organics and solubilisation efficiency with respect to disintegration time. Organics solubilisation is the process of converting or disintegrating particulate organics into pliable biodegradable compounds for cell lysis induced by microbial stress within the sludge [27]. Microbial stress headed to lysis and induced the intracellular substances to leak out of the microbial cell that promotes solubilisation. The parameters SCOD and COD solubilisation efficiency quantified the soluble organic release in the sludge. (Fig. 2b ) detailed the SCOD release and solubilisation efficiency of control flocculated and deflocculated sludge. The profile of solubilisation obeyed the Gaussian plot with dual phases: liquefaction phase and depletion phase. Kavitha et al., [6], Sharmila et al., [7], Banu et al., [1] showed similar profile of solubilisation in the research work. In the liquefaction phase, the SCOD concentration increased from 0–123 mg/L, 0–441 mg/L and 0–808 mg/L, respectively for control, flocculated and deflocculated sludge, respectively up to the disintegration time of 42 h. This increment signifies that the liberated enzymes of the grown inoculated bacteria breaks the microbial cell to release of intracellular substances and liquefies them to the aqueous phase in the sludge [25]. The augmentation of disintegration time beyond 42 h promoted solubilisation decrement indicating depletion phase and resulted in null solubilisation at the end. This depletion phase implies the complete consumption of substrate in the sludge that promotes the utilization of solubilized organics by the inoculated bacteria [28]. The higher solubilisation of 1.69%, 8.2% and 16%, respectively were achieved for control, flocculated and deflocculated sludge. Of these three samples, the deflocculated sludge yielded better solubilization efficiency due to deflocculation that enabled quick accessibility of substrate by inoculated bacteria for the disintegration process. Control sludge showed scanty solubilization owing to the absence of inoculated bacterial strain to induce disintegration. Finally, the observed result clearly indicated that the solubilisation efficiency peaked at 42 h of disintegration time, which ought to be an optimum condition to promote better sludge disintegration. The standard T test correlation between the soluble organic release of flocculated and deflocculated sludge showed significant difference since the p value calculated was 0.006 which was lesser than 0.05.


3.3.3 Macromolecules release

The released intracellular stuff protein and carbohydrate during disintegration was depicted in (Fig. 3 ). The plot of protein and carbohydrate was in conformity with the SCOD release plot. As explained in SCOD plot, the variation of protein was increasing up to 42 h from 0 to 6.88 mg/L, 0 to 246.96 mg/L, 0 to 452.48 mg/L, respectively for control, flocculated and deflocculated sludge. Similarly, carbohydrate release increased from 0 mg/L to 44.28 mg/L, 158.76 mg/L and 290.88 mg/L, respectively for control, flocculated and deflocculated sludge. Beyond 42 h, decrement of intracellular stuffs within the sludge. This decrement might be the degradation of protein into amino acids and peptides by protease enzyme and carbohydrate degradation to simple sugar by amylase enzyme [29]. Increment in release of protein and carbohydrates was due to cell lysis. A decrement in protein and carbohydrate indicates the non-availability of substrate for inoculated substrate that promotes depletion of the released intracellular stuff. On Comparative analysis, control exhibited trivial protein and carbohydrate due to the presence of solubilised and particulate organics. In addition, the solubilisation was higher in deflocculated sludge due to the dispersion of the microbial cell and exopolymer removal. Maximum protein, carbohydrate and SCOD release of 452.48 mg/L, 290.88 mg/L and 808 mg/L, respectively was achieved in deflocculated sludge under the optimized disintegration time of 42 h. This implies the complete release of intracellular substances. The p-value calculated during the standard T test for protein and carbohydrate were found to be 0.021 and 0.022 which is less than 0.05 and implies the significant difference between flocculated and deflocculated sludge.


3.3.4 Suspended free cells growth dynamics on WAS

A simple method to enlist the microbial cell is the plating technique. These techniques carried out to estimate the inoculated bacterial strains growth and enzyme metabolism. The selective medium used in the current research was skimmed milk agar according to the description provided in [2]. The inoculated bacteria used to disintegrate was plated on a skimmed agar medium for secreting protease strain to form colonies which was counted for each time interval. The empirical equation used to calculate the specific growth rate of bacterial cell was given as follows: FORMULA: μ = ln N 2 - - l n N 0 / t 2 - - t 0 N_2 = No of cells (CFU/mL) on time t_2 N_0 = No of cells (CFU/mL) on time t_0

(Fig. 4 ) elucidates the specific growth rate of inoculated bacterial cell with respect to disintegration time. It clearly described that the enzyme activity and specific growth rate falls into four distinct phases namely: Acclimatization phase (0–15 h), exponential phase (18–42 h), steady phase (48–72 h) and drop phase (78–92 h). A similar pattern of phase distinction was found in the literature of Ushani et al., [30]. In addition, it was evident that the intracellular enzyme (protease and amylase) tempted the growth of bacterial cell that determines the specific growth rate (μ). The minimal specific growth rate was observed in the acclimatization phase that is about 0.034–0.035 h^−1. This slow growth rate indicates the acclimatization of the substrate to the sludge conditions and less potency of the enzyme to perform disintegration. During the exponential phase, the protease and amylase enzyme activity increases with the subsequent increment in growth rate. This increment infers the release of intracellular organics inducing solubilization. The maximum growth rate achieved at 42 h was 0.2 h^−1 and enzymatic action (protease – 0.28 U/mL and amylase – 0.2 U/mL). In steady phase, there found a stability in μ and enzymatic action because of the saturation of hydrolytic activity. At last, μ and enzymatic action reaches drop phase. In drop phase, the inoculated bacteria lack efficiency in the growth rate and enzyme secretion attributable to the substrate depletion. In addition, (Fig. 4 ) details the soluble organic matter release (SOM). Up to the 42 h of disintegration time, the SOM increases and reached a maximum of 440 mg/L owing to increased enzyme activity and growth rate. Beyond 42 h, SOM decreases due to the reduced enzyme activity and growth rate. In accordance with the above discussion, disintegration time 42 h was an optimal duration for effective enzyme secreting bacteria disintegration.


3.4 Biomethane assay

Methane production from the control, flocculated and deflocculated sludge was used to investigate the efficiency of TCTF mediated enzyme secreting bacterial disintegration. The methane production of control, flocculated and deflocculated sludge was observed in (Fig. 5a ) Due to the acclimatization of the inoculum to the substrate environment, scanty methane production was seen up to 5 days for all samples (Control – 13.57 mL/g COD, flocculated – 48.51 mL/g COD, deflocculated – 83.62 mL/g COD). Beyond 5 days, the methane generation increases gradually and reached a maximum methane production rate of 0.978 mL/g COD.d (control), 11.14 mL/g COD.d (flocculated) and 21.03 mL/g COD.d (deflocculated) at 15 days. The maximum achieved methane generation was 20.405 mL/g COD, 81.45 mL/g COD and 140.40 mL/g COD, respectively for control, flocculated and deflocculated sludge samples. This increment implies higher methanogens inhabitants that is due to better consumption of substrates by the methanogens. Also, it was evident that the deflocculated sludge showed higher methane generation than control and flocculated sludge. This confirms that deflocculation and disintegration process enhances the easy accessibility of substrate by the methanogens promoting higher methane yield. However, poor substrate accessibility of substrate in control hinders the methanogenic activity promoting very less methane production. Complete consumption of substrate beyond 15 days resulted in inadequate and stabilized methane production. This in turn, starts the endogenous respiration beyond 15 days which leads to the decrement in methane production rate. The substrate biodegradability and hydrolysis rate of all three sludge samples was estimated via non-linear regression. The obtained parameters: hydrolysis rate constant and biodegradability were given in (Fig. 5b ). Each ellipse indicates 95% confidence for control, flocculated and deflocculated sludge samples. The effect of deflocculation and disintegration was included in the confidence region which was increased gradually. The biodegradability and hydrolysis constant during proposed treatment was also estimated. The higher biodegradability and hydrolysis constant was achieved in deflocculated sludge (Xd = 0.185 gCOD/gCOD; ɵ = 0.191 d^−1) than flocculated (Xd = 0.102 gCOD/gCOD; ɵ = 0.16 d^−1) and control (Xd = 0.048 gCOD/gCOD; ɵ = 0.108 d^−1) sludge.


3.5 Energetic, solid and cost-benefit analysis

This analysis of the current research was performed to detail the possibility of treatment process in pilot scale [31]. Based on the research of Eswari et al., [32], the treatment efficiency of the proposed method was investigated using the attained investigational outcomes for one ton of sludge (assumed). Energy intake and profit of treatment process was evaluated preceding to cost estimation. Detailed energetic, solid and cost analysis was carried out to assess the proficiency of the TCTF mediated enzyme secreting bacterial pretreatment that was provided in (Fig. 6 ). Energetic balance deliberated the energy depleted and gained during the treatment process. The energy depleted in the form of stirring, pumping and heat loss. The total energy consumed during treatment for flocculated and deflocculated sludge was estimated to be −441.48, and −442 kW h, respectively. Gained energy was the methane achieved in flocculated and deflocculated sludge as 225, and 468.44 kWh, respectively. Taking the difference of depleted and gained energy gives the net energy. From the observed (Fig. 6 ), the deflocculated samples documented high net energy of 26.44 kWh which signifies the efficiency of TCTF mediated enzyme secreting bacterial disintegration. Less net energy achieved in flocculated (−216.48 kWh) sludge.

The solid balance of the proposed method was shown in (Fig. 6 ). The overall solid decreased in the sludge treatment was 306.25, and 478 kg for flocculated and deflocculated sludge, respectively. Overall solid reduction of 47.8% was achieved during anaerobic digestion of TCTF mediated bacterial disintegration. Of these, anaerobic digestion alone reduced 23.1% and 34.8% of solids for flocculated and deflocculated sludge. The net solid for disposal in this proposed work was predicted to be 693.75 and 522 kg, correspondingly for the flocculated and deflocculated samples. About 77.01 and 33.62% of solid has been reduced in the deflocculated sludge than the control and flocculated sludge samples, respectively. Maximum solid reduced in deflocculated sludge via landfill and fetches revenue by decreasing the cost required for landfilling.

The net cost (NC) of the flocculated and deflocculated sample were assessed to be USD (35.96, and 89.92). Cost analysis detailed the cost spent for consumables and solids to be disposed. TCTF can be reused which resulted in negligible consumable cost. Also, it restricts the availability of photocatalysts in the effluent stream during disposal which enables easy disposal of sludge directly after this proposed management process. About 0.28 USD cost was utilized for disposing per kg of sludge. The output energy obtained as methane gained 0.23 USD/kWh. The cost of profitable methane energy during flocculated and deflocculated sludge was 51.75 and 107.74 USD respectively. The high net cost of the proposed method of treatment was achieved in deflocculated samples. It is understandable from the above findings that the TCTF mediated enzyme secreting bacterial pretreatment can be a better option for sludge management with high energy ratio of 1.05. The net profit of the proposed treatment method was comparatively higher than that of net profit of Chi et al., [33] and Park et al., [34] which was about 83.39 and 21.54 USD/Ton of sludge respectively during anaerobic digestion of the pretreated sludge. Also, Ushani et al., [30] performed similar phase separated bacterial pretreatment and achieved net profit of only 2.6 USD/ton of sludge. Sun et al., [35] earned 68.57 USD/t of sludge as net profit in hydrocyclone pretreatment. An overall comparative study has drawn and concluded that the proposed treatment method was profitable at large scale.


4 Future perspective

At present, air purifications using TiO_2 photocatalytic are in practice. Its utilization in the field of wastewater and sludge treatment has gained higher importance because of non-toxic by-products. Numerous laboratorial research regarding the usage of TiO_2 in wastewater and waste activated sludge (WAS) treatment is still in demo scale. The research on photocatalytic thin film utilization for sludge treatment was a growing technology. Performance evaluation of reusability thin film photocatalyst requires more investigation is forthcoming. Also, detailed examination of thin film surface deviation analysis was obligatory. Hence, a broad investigation is necessary to push this process to large scale.


5 Conclusion

The potency of TCTF mediated enzyme secreting bacterial disintegration was estimated by biomethanation analysis. The flocculated and deflocculated sludge efficiently liberates maximum intracellular organic stuff (Protein – 246.96 mg/L flocculated and 452.42 mg/L deflocculated; Carbohydrate – 158.76 mg/L flocculated and 290.88 mg/L deflocculated) within the microbial cell at 42 h of disintegration time. But, deflocculated sludge showed more solubilisation (16%) and solid reduction (12.5%) which increases the substrate accessibility further treatment process. An enhanced bioenergy production of 0.32 gCOD/gCOD was recorded in deflocculated sludge having 89.92 USD/Ton of sludge as net profit at an accessible level.


 CRediT authorship contribution statement

J. Rajesh Banu: Conceptualization, Supervision, Investigation, Methodology. V. Godvin Sharmila: Writing - original draft. S. Kavitha: Data curation. R. Rajajothi: Methodology. M. Gunasekaran: Methodology. S. Angappane: Methodology. Gopalakrishnan Kumar: Resources.