TITLE: Impact of the thermo-alkaline pretreatment on the anaerobic digestion of poly(butylene adipate-co-terephthalate) (PBAT) and poly(lactic acid) (PLA) blended plastics


1 Introduction

In 2022, global plastic production reached 400.3 million tons [1]. The massive use and improper disposal of plastics haves caused a number of environmental problems, such as microplastic pollution of marine and terrestrial ecosystems, human health hazards and enormous CO_2 emissions [2,3]. Biodegradable plastics, which can be mineralized by microorganisms, are an important alternative to conventional plastics [4].

Currently, poly(butylene adipate-co-terephthalate) (PBAT) and poly(lactic acid) (PLA) are two biodegradable plastics with the high production capacity worldwide, accounting for 4.5 % and 20.7 % of the global bioplastic production capacity, respectively [5]. PBAT is a petroleum-based biodegradable plastic with good mechanical properties [6],while PLA is a bio-based biodegradable plastic and is considered one of the most promising materials [7]. In application, PBAT is often used in co-blends with PLA to make different types of packaging materials such as plastic bags and food packaging [8,9].

Anaerobic digestion (AD) is a promising method for energy and resource recovery of organic waste, such as food waste, agricultural waste and sewage sludge, etc. Cazaudehore et al., [2]. Packaging materials made from PBAT/PLA plastics would easily enter the biogas plants together with food waste [8]. Biodegradable plastics are believed to regulate the C/N ratio of food waste for the biogas plants [10]. Therefore, the degradability of the biodegradable plastics in AD affects whether their organic carbon can be used efficiently.

However, with the exception of polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) and starch-based plastics, most remaining biodegradable plastics slowly degrade in the AD process and cannot reach complete degradation at the typical hydraulic residence time (15–30 days) of the biogas plants [2,11]. Therefore, there is a need to increase the degradability of biodegradable plastics in AD. Feedstock pretreatments are used in AD plants to increase biomethane production or digester performance [12]. For biodegradable plastics, mechanical pretreatment [7,13], chemical pretreatment [14-16,7,17], and thermal pretreatment have been reported [15,7,18]. Among the different pretreatment technologies, the combination of alkaline and thermal pretreatments shows better performance than a single method. Benn and Zitomer [15] studied the effect of pretreatments on the AD of polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) at different temperatures (35–90 °C), different pH values (8<pH<12) and different treatment times (3–48 h). The cumulative methane production of the treated PHB increased by 2–100 % and the pretreatment shortened the lag phase. Similarly, Cazaudehore et al. [7] carried out the pretreatment for PLA at different temperatures (70–150 °C), different Ca(OH)_2 concentrations (0.5–5 % w/v) and different treatment times (1–48 h). The results showed that the thermo-alkaline pretreatment significantly increased the anaerobic degradability of PLA under mesophilic conditions. The treated PLA reached the stable stage of methane production within 30 days. The above studies suggest that thermo-alkaline pretreatment is an effective way to improve the anaerobic degradability of biodegradable plastics. However, current studies mainly focus on relatively easily degradable plastics under both mesophilic and thermophilic conditions such as PHAs, or plastics presenting a good degradability under thermophilic conditions such as PLA. Studies on PBAT, which are poorly degradable under both thermophilic and mesophilic conditions, are lacking [9].

Furthermore, previous studies mainly focus on the effect of pretreatments on the methane production of the biodegradable plastics. One study also tested the changes of functional groups of PLA along with the pretreatment strength and particle size [19]. But the changes in the physicochemical properties of biodegradable plastics, such as molecular weight, and crystallinity, after the pretreatment and in the subsequent AD process are not yet been fully characterized. It is also worrying whether the pre-treatment would lead to an increased formation of biodegradable microplastics (MPs), which may then enter the soil with digestates through incomplete digestion in the anaerobic digestion process, leading to soil pollution [20] and mammal health risks [21].

The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of thermo-alkaline pretreatment on PBAT, PLA raw materials in pellets and PBAT/PLA plastic bags in three aspects: 1) quantify the enhancement of methane production; 2) decipher anaerobic degradation mechanisms; and 3) discover formation pathways of MPs.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Materials

The four biodegradable plastics tested in this experiment were two raw materials, including PBAT pellets (TH801T, Xinjiang Blue Ridge Tunhe Sci.&Tech Co., Ltd., China, 5 mm), and PLA pellets (Ingeo™ 4032D, NatureWorks LLC, USA, 4 mm); and two commercial plastic products, including PBAT/PLA plastic bags (referred to as PL1) and PBAT/PLA/starch plastic bags (Henan Tianren Biomaterials Co., Ltd., China, referred to as PL2). The two plastic bags were cut into 2 cm × 2 cm square pieces. The mesophilic inoculum consisted of granular sludge from an anaerobic wastewater treatment reactor of a paper mill in Suzhou, Anhui, China, which was ground and passed through a 2 mm sieve. This sludge was taken back to the laboratory and incubated at 55 °C for 15 days as thermophilic inoculum. During this time, it was fed with the feedstock slurry from an AD plant treating food waste in Shanghai. The properties of the inocula and the biodegradable plastics are listed in Table S1.


2.2 Pretreatment of plastics

The conditions of the thermo-alkaline pretreatment were referred to the modified recommended condition for promoting the mesophilic anaerobic degradation of PLA as reported by Cazaudehore et al. [7]. The NaOH concentration was 1 % (w/v) and the ratio of the plastic samples to the alkaline solution was 50 g TS/L. The glass bottles containing the plastic samples and the alkaline solution were heated in a water bath at 70 °C for 48 h. The treated samples were divided into solid and liquid fractions by filtration through a 0.45 µm polyethersulfone (PES) membrane. The solid fraction was carefully rinsed with deionized water and then dried with a vacuum freeze dryer (FD-1 C, BIOCOOL Instruments Co., Ltd., China) for subsequent physicochemical property analysis and anaerobic incubations. The four pretreated plastics were designated PLA-T, PBAT-T, PL1-T and PL2-T.


2.3 Batch experiment

The original and pretreated biodegradable plastics were tested in serum bottles (1 L) under mesophilic (35 ± 1 °C) at a thermostatic chamber and thermophilic conditions (55 ± 1 °C) by using water bath. The bottles were filled with 5 g VS of the plastics, 165 mL of the mesophilic inoculum or 192 mL of the thermophilic inoculum, maintaining an inoculum/substrate ratio of 3 g VS/g VS [22], and the water until a working volume of 500 mL. The bottles containing only inoculum (Blk) were also incubated to determine the contribution of inoculum to methane yield. The bottles were then sealed and the headspace were flushed with nitrogen three times. The tests were conducted in triplicate for 100 days with the bottles being manually shaken once a day. The samples, including the plastic residues and the digestates, were taken on day 40 (M40) and day 80 (M80) of the mesophilic incubation and after 25 days (T25) and 60 days (T60) of the thermophilic incubation. The remaining plastic was dried and stored at room temperature. The digestate samples were stored in a freezer at –40 °C for further analysis. The plastic samples of PLA, PLA-T and PL1-T for T60 were not obtained as they could not be effectively separated from the digestate. In addition, no PL2-T samples were not obtained during the anaerobic incubations because the plastic was powdered after the pretreatment.


2.4 Analytical methods

The volume and the methane content of biogas were determined by a handheld barometer (Testo 512, Germany) and a biogas analyzer (BIOGAS 5000, Geotech, UK). All the data were reported at the standard state. Total solids (TS) and volatile solids (VS) were determined using the APHA standard methods [23]. Elemental composition (C/H/N), dissolved organic carbon (DOC), NH_4 ^+-N and pH were measured using an elemental analyzer (Elementar Vario EL Cube, Germany), a TOC analyzer (TOC-L CPH/CPN, Shimadzu, Japan), a Kjeldahl nitrogen analyzer (UDK-159, Velp Scientifica Srl, Italy) and a pH meter (pHs-2 F, Shanghai Precision Scientific Instruments Co., Ltd.), respectively.

The optical images and scanning electron microscope (SEM) were performed on the plastics using a scanner (PERFECTION V850 PRO, EPSON, Japan) and a SEM (Tescan MIRA LMS, Czech Republic). Functional groups on the surfaces of the plastics were determined using an attenuated total reflectance-Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR) equipped with an ATR accessory (ThermoFisher, Nicolet FT-IR, USA). ^1H Nuclear magnetic resonance (^1H NMR) spectra were performed on the plastics after the pretreatment and after the incubations at different sampling times using with a 600 MHz NMR spectrometer (Avance III, Bruker, Germany) with the solvent of CDCl_3. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the raw and pretreated plastics were analyzed by X-ray diffractometer (Aeris, Malvern Panalytical, UK) in the range of 2θ from 5° to 50° at 40 kV and 15 mA. The molecular weights of plastic samples were determined through gel permeation chromatography (GPC). The GPC system (D-2208, Shimadzu, Japan) was equipped with a refractive index detector. Plastic samples were dissolved in tetrahydrofuran (THF), filtered through a 0.22 µm polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) filter. The concentration of the samples was about 2 mg/mL and the flow rate was 0.5 mL/min. Analyses were carried out at 40 °C. Molecular weights were calibrated using polystyrene standards.

The digestate samples of 0.3 mL for PL1-T and PL2-T at different sampling times (M40, M80, T25, T60) were taken for the MPs analysis. The digestates were applied to an acrylic tray, then dried at room temperature and scanned using a scanner (PERFECTION V850 PRO, EPSON, Japan) with the black paperboard as the background. The scan images were adjusted and analyzed using ImageJ to determine the number and the area of the MPs. The lower limit of the area was set as 0.0018 mm^2. The size of the MPs was expressed in terms of the equivalent diameter, which was that of the circle with the same projected area [24].

The analyses of the microbial community were performed on the digestate samples. The primer 515 F (5′-GTGCCAGCMGCCGCGGTAA-3′) and 806 R (5′-GGACTACVSGGGTATCTAAT-3′) targeted at the V4 region of 16 S rRNA genes of both archaea and bacteria were used for the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification. The subsequent sequencing (PE300) was carried out on an Illumina Miseq platform (Illumina, San Diego, USA) provided by Majorbio Bio–Pharm Technology Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China). The details of the data treatment were described in a previous paper [25].


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Effect of thermo-alkaline pretreatment on PBAT/PLA plastics methanization

The cumulative methane production of the plastics samples under mesophilic and thermophilic conditions are shown in Fig. 1. Under mesophilic conditions (Fig. 1a), there was no significant difference in cumulative methane production between the plastic samples and the Blk, except for PL2 and PL2-T. This indicated that PLA, PBAT, and PL1 were not converted to CH_4 and CO_2 under mesophilic conditions, either with or without pretreatment. Cazaudehore et al. [7] found that the thermo-alkaline pretreatment with lower Ca(OH)_2 addition (70 °C + 0.5 % Ca(OH)_2 for 48 h) can significantly promote CH_4 production of PLA under mesophilic conditions, leading to a cumulative methane production of 167 ± 11 NL/kg VS and 48 ± 4 NL/kg VS for the treated and untreated PLA, respectively. However, no improvement in methanogenesis by pretreatment was observed during the 100-day incubation in this experiment. The PLA pellet size used in this experiment (4 mm) was larger than that used in the experiment conducted by Cazaudehore et al. [7] (2 mm) and in this study only the solid fraction was tested, which was not hydrolyzed enough to make the plastics penetrate the cell membranes of microorganisms, accounting for the poor pretreatment effect. Nevertheless, the thermo-alkaline pretreatment promoted methane production of PL2. The cumulative methane production was 51 ± 2 NmL/g VS_add for PL2-T and 34 ± 2 NmL/g VS_add for PL2 on day 100 of the incubation. PL2 and PL2-T degraded faster than other biodegradable plastics because the starch is more prone to degradation under anaerobic conditions [3].

Under thermophilic conditions (Fig. 1b), all plastic samples showed an obvious degradation. For both PL2 and PL2-T, the methane production rates were higher than the other plastic samples during the early incubation period, approximately 20 days. In addition, the methane production rate of PL2-T was higher than that of PL2. However, in the later stage (80–100 days), the rate of methanogenesis of PL2 increased. After 100 days, the cumulative methane production of PL2 and PL2-T was equivalent, namely 117 ± 13 NmL/g VS_add and 115 ± 5 NmL/g VS_add, respectively. However, for PL1 and PL1-T, the cumulative methane production of PL1-T (90 ± 2 NmL/g VS_add) was significantly lower than that of PL1 (148 ± 18 NmL/g VS_add). For PLA and PLA-T, the methane production rate of PLA-T was significantly higher than that of PLA in the initial phase. The cumulative methane production of PLA (48 ± 9 NmL/g VS_add) was less than half that of PLA-T (120 ± 8 NmL/g VS_add) after 22 days of incubation. Similar to PL2, the methane production rate of PLA increased as incubation progressed, exceeding that of PLA-T after 75 days. At the end of the incubation, the cumulative methane production of PLA and PLA-T was 366 ± 17 NmL/g VS_add and 334 ± 22 NmL/g VS_add respectively, which was about 79 % of the theoretical methane production of PLA (467 NmL/g VS (F. [26])). The data of PBAT and PBAT-T on cumulative methane production and daily methane yield were fit with a modified Gompertz model by using “scipy” library in Python 3.9. The maximum methane production rate of PBAT-T was 5.79 NmL/g VS_add per day, while that of PBAT (5.29 NmL/g VS_add per day) was lower than PBAT-T. After 100 days, the cumulative methane production (corrected for inoculum control) of PBAT and PBAT-T was the same, and was 91 ± 14 NmL/g VS_add and 91 ± 7 NmL/g VS_add, respectively.

The promoting effect of high temperature on the anaerobic degradation of the biodegradable plastics has been widely confirmed [22,27,28]. Under mesophilic conditions, pretreatment only promoted anaerobic degradation of the plastics containing starch. Under thermophilic conditions, pretreatment of PLA, PBAT and PL2-T increased the rate of methane production early in the incubation. As the incubation progressed, the methane production rate of the untreated plastic accelerated, so that at the end of the incubation, the cumulative methane production of the pretreated and untreated plastics was similar. This phenomenon was also found in the studies about the AD of biodegradable plastics of different surfaces or molecular weights [13,29]. However, for PL1, the thermo-alkaline pretreatment reduced the cumulative methane production. In the following sections, the changes in the physicochemical properties of plastics after pretreatment and anaerobic degradation are further analyzed to explain the positive or negative effect of the pretreatment on the methane production.


3.2 Analyses of degradation mechanism


3.2.1 Morphological analysis of the samples surface

Appearance changes of the biodegradable plastics before and after the pretreatment and after the anaerobic degradation are shown in Fig. S1. It is noted that the materials tested in this study were fragmented after pretreatment (Fig. S1), it was difficult to test the mechanical properties such as tensile strength. Fig. 2 shows the SEM images of plastic samples before and after the pretreatment and after the anaerobic degradation. For PLA, PBAT and PL1, the surface for the raw materials was smooth. After the thermo-alkaline pretreatment, the surface was corroded and clear cracks and pore structures formed. This phenomenon was similar to that reported by Cazaudehore et al. [7] and Benn and Zitomer [15] for the corrosion of PLA and for PHB by the thermo-alkaline pretreatment. By increasing the surface area and porosity, the enzyme binding sites are increased and the hydrolysis of the plastics is accelerated [30], thereby promoting biodegradation [15]. This was consistent with the observation that the methane production was higher for the pretreated plastics during the early incubation time under thermophilic conditions.

No significant surface changes were observed for PL1 under thermophilic conditions after 25 days, while PL2 clearly developed holes on the surface. At this time, the cumulative methane production was 96 ± 6 NmL/g VS_add and 108 ± 8 NmL/g VS_add for PL1 and PL2, respectively. The erosion mechanisms of biodegradable plastics can be divided into surface erosion and bulk erosion [31]. In the case of surface erosion, degradation occurs primarily in the outermost polymer layers. In contrast, in bulk erosion, the entire polymer is rapidly hydrated and the degradation is not confined to the plastic surface. The easily degradable polymers tend to be surface eroding, while less reactive polymers tend to be bulk eroding, such as PLA. It has been speculated that at the onset of thermophilic incubation, the main erosion mechanism of PL1 was bulk erosion, while for PL2, it was surface erosion.


3.2.2 Molecular weight analysis

The number average molecular weight (M_n), weight average molecular weight (M_w) and polydispersity index (PDI) of the biodegradable plastics before and after the pretreatment and after the anaerobic degradation are shown in Table S3. PDI is the ratio of M_w to M_n, used to characterize the range of molecular weight distribution. A larger PDI means a broader molecular weight distribution [32]. For all four plastic samples tested in this study, the pretreatment markedly reduced the molecular weight of the raw materials. The M_n of PLA, PBAT, PL1 and PL2 was reduced by 74 %, 16 %, 56 % and 80 %, respectively. The molecular weight is an important factor for controlling the degradability of the biodegradable plastics. The polymers with lower molecular weights are more prone to microbial degradation as they are more likely to depolymerize into oligomers and monomers [10]. The molecular weight of the plastics was thus reduced by the thermo-alkaline pretreatment, which accelerated the methane production during the subsequent anaerobic degradation.

Under mesophilic conditions, the molecular weight of the plastics decreased with increasing incubation time, but no significant conversion to methane was observed for the plastic samples except PL2. The decrease of the molecular weights is due to the hydrolysis of the ester bonds, resulting in the shorter molecular chain lengths [9]. This indicated that hydrolysis took place, but the hydrolytic products, consisting of low molecular weight oligomers, were not converted into biogas, which suggests that the promotion of bioplastics biogas production with such thermo-alkaline pretreatment is limited under mesophilic conditions. Under thermophilic conditions, the decrease in the molecular weights of the plastics was more pronounced. For PLA, M_n had decreased to 5016 Da after 25 days of thermophilic incubation, while it was still around 100000 Da after 40 days of mesophilic incubation. High temperature can promote the abiotic hydrolysis of PLA. In one study, after 28 days of abiotic hydrolysis at 58 °C, the M_w of PLA decreased from more than 200000 Da initially to less than 50000 Da [33]. In addition, degradation of the plastics can be accompanied by a decrease in molecular weight and an increase in PDI [34]. However, PDI did not show a clear pattern with degradation time in this study.


3.2.3 Chemical structure analysis

Fig. 3 shows the ^1H NMR spectra of plastic samples before and after the pretreatment and after the anaerobic degradation. The peak at δ = 8.1 ppm represents the proton on the benzene ring of PBAT, and the peak at δ = 2.33 ppm is attributed to the β proton of adipic acid in PBAT [35]. The peak at δ = 5.17 ppm is associated with the proton of the PLA methylene group, and the peak at δ = 1.59 ppm represents the methyl proton [36]. For PLA (Fig. 3a), no difference between the pretreated PLA and the original material was observed in the ^1H NMR spectra. Furthermore, after 80 days of mesophilic degradation, the methyl proton peak (δ = 1.48 ppm) representing the PLA monomers did not appear in the ^1H NMR spectra for either pretreated or untreated PLA [37]. This was consistent was the finding that no conversion of PLA to CH_4 occurred under mesophilic conditions. However, after 25 days of thermophilic AD, the methyl proton peak of PLA monomers can be observed in the ^1H NMR spectra of PLA-T and PLA, and the intensity of the peak for PLA-T was higher than that of PLA. This indicated that as this time both PLA-T and PLA were hydrolyzed to lactate monomers, and that the degree of hydrolysis of PLA-T was higher, resulting in a higher methane production of PLA-T.

For PBAT (Fig. 3b), the ratio between the integral of the peak at δ = 2.33 ppm and the integral of the peak at δ = 8.1 ppm represents the ratio of aliphatic to aromatic components in PBAT. After 80 days of mesophilic AD, this ratio did not change significantly for either PBAT or PBAT-T. However, after 60 days of thermophilic AD, this ratio decreased significantly for both PBAT and PBAT-T. This was consistent with the fact that PBAT and PBAT-T did not degrade under mesophilic conditions, but degraded markedly under thermophilic conditions. It also showed that the aliphatic components in PBAT degraded faster than the aromatic components [38]. In addition, new peaks appeared at δ = 3.73 ppm, δ = 3.67 ppm and δ = 2.26 ppm for PBAT and PBAT-T after 60 days of thermophilic AD. The two triplets centered at δ = 3.73 ppm and δ = 3.67 ppm can be attributed to the -CH_2OH protons of a butanediol unit associated with a terephthalate or an adipate unit, respectively [39]. The formation of these two triple peaks indicated cleavage of the ester bonds between terephthalate and adipate. The peak at δ = 2.26 ppm can be assigned to the CH_2-COOH groups [40]. This suggested that the ester bond located within the adipate unit also underwent hydrolysis. These results indicated that the ester bond between terephthalate and adipate as well as the internal ester bond of adipate in PBAT were hydrolyzed in the process of long-term thermophilic AD.

Based on the chemical structures of PLA and PBAT, the ratio of the integral of the peak of the PLA methyl group at δ = 5.17 ppm to the integral of the peak of the protons on the benzene ring of PBAT at δ = 2.33 ppm represents the ratio of PLA to the aromatic components of PBAT. For PL1, after the pretreatment, the proton peak representing the PLA methyl group disappeared completely and the ratio of aliphatic to aromatic components in PBAT decreased from 1.12 to 1.00 (Fig. 3c). These results indicated that the pretreatment completely dissolved PLA from PL1 and partially dissolved aliphatic components from PBAT. In addition, in the ^1H NMR spectrum of PL1-T, the triple peaks at δ = 3.73 ppm and δ = 3.67 ppm were also observed. This suggested that the pretreatment hydrolyzed the ester bonds between terephthalate and adipate. Under mesophilic conditions, the ^1H NMR spectra of PL1 and PL1-T were similar to those of the original material. However, after thermophilic AD, the proportion of PLA in PL1 decreased significantly, and the ratio of aliphatic to aromatic components in PBAT for PL1 also decreased from 1.12 to 1.04. This indicated that for PBAT/PLA blends, PLA and the aliphatic components in PBAT were first degraded during the AD process. For PL1-T, the remaining component was mainly PBAT after the pretreatment, which could explain the lower methane production of PL1-T than that of PL1 (containing easily degradable PLA) under thermophilic conditions. Interestingly, the cumulative methane production of PL1-T and PBAT at the end of the thermophilic incubation was close, namely 90 ± 2 NmL/g VS_add and 91 ± 14 NmL/g VS_add, respectively.

For PL2 (Fig. 3d), the ratio of PLA to the aliphatic component in PBAT of 0.2 is much lower than that of PL1 (1.36), suggesting that PL2 has a lower proportion of PLA. Similar to PL1, the peak of PLA methyl group disappeared and the proportion of aliphatic component in PBAT decreased after the thermo-alkaline pretreatment. The triple peaks at δ = 3.73 ppm and δ = 3.67 ppm were also observed in the spectrum of PL2-T. After 40 days of mesophilic AD, neither the ratio of PLA to aromatic component in PBAT nor the ratio of aliphatic to aromatic component in PBAT changed significantly, indicating that the starch in PL2 was mainly degraded at this point. After 80 days of the incubation, the proportion of PLA decreased more significantly than that of the aliphatic component in PBAT. This suggested that PLA was preferentially degraded. Under thermophilic conditions, both the proportions of PLA and aliphatic component in PBAT of PL2 gradually decreased with increasing incubation time. After 60 days, the PLA methyl group peak in PL2 disappeared, indicating that PLA was completely degraded. These results indicated that the degradation priority in PBAT/PLA/starch blends was starch, PLA and the aliphatic components in PBAT.


3.3 Formation pathways of MPs

The scanned image and the image treated by ImageJ for the digestate sample are shown in Fig. S2. Table 1 shows the number and total area of MPs in the digestate samples for PL1-T and PL2-T under both mesophilic and thermophilic conditions. For PL1-T, during the mesophilic incubation after 80 days, the number of MPs per mL digestate was about 1.7 times higher than after 40 days and the area was twice as large as after 40 days. The increase in the number of MPs is due to the hydrolysis of the plastic, which allows the plastic to form more small fragments. However, under thermophilic conditions, the number of MPs did not increase significantly with increasing incubation time. On the 60th day, the number and area of MPs were 1.2 and 1.1 times higher than on the 25th day, respectively. In the biodegradation process, the biodegradable plastics are hydrolyzed into oligomers and monomers before they can be further utilized by microorganisms [10]. Due to the hydrolysis of plastics and the utilization by microorganisms, the MPs are continuously degraded during formation. Therefore, the number of MPs increased less under thermophilic conditions than under mesophilic conditions. PL2-T had formed into powder form after the pretreatment. Therefore, the number of MPs was much larger than that of PL1-T. Under thermophilic condition, the amount and area of MPs at day 60 were reduced by 16 % and 22 %, respectively, compared to those at day 25. These results showed that under thermophilic conditions, MPs were continuously hydrolyzed and absorbed by microorganisms, leading to the reduction in the number of MPs.

Fig. 4 shows the size range of MPs in the digestate samples for PL1-T and PL2-T under both mesophilic and thermophilic conditions. For PL1-T, under mesophilic conditions (Fig. 4a), the size range of the MPs did not change over the incubation period. The largest proportion of MPs was 100–300 µm in size and made up about 46 %. The MPs with a size less than 500 µm accounted for more than 90 %. For PL2-T, MPs with a size of 50–100 µm accounted for the largest proportion, about 58 %. Under thermophilic conditions (Fig. 4b), the size range of MPs in the digestate sample of PL2-T was similar to that under mesophilic conditions. For PL1-T, about 20 % of the MPs were smaller than 50 µm by day 25. This may be due to the strong hydrolysis of the plastics at this stage. On the 60th day, the proportion of MPs with sizes 50–100 µm and 100–300 µm increased, which was attributed to the ingestion and utilization of the smaller MPs by microorganisms.

MPs derived from traditional plastics such as PE, PP, PET, etc. have been detected in the digestates of anaerobic reactors fed with food waste. Yang et al. [41] reported the amount, size, shape, and material type of MPs in raw digestates, digestate solids and digestate liquids from four biogas plants. The results showed that the number of plastic debris in the raw digestates ranged from 41 to 3298/kg (wet weight), of which about 70 % were MPs (< 5 mm). About 6.6 % of the MPs were smaller than 500 µm. In this study, more than 90 % of the MPs in the digestate samples were less than 500 µm in size. There are limited reports on biodegradable MPs during anaerobic digestion of food waste. Ruggero et al. [42] detected the Mater-Bi® (starch-based) MPs in the samples of food waste pulp after the pretreatment in an AD plant. The number of MPs was 14 ± 1.5/10 g samples, of which the number of Mater-Bi® MPs was 8.4 ± 0.5. Lu et al. [43] studied the co-digestion of PLA MPs (1.5 mm) and kitchen waste, and stereomicroscope images showed that PLA-MPs turned into irregular fragments after thermophilic incubation, but they did not quantitatively describe the number and size range of the MPs. This study showed that the thermo-alkaline pretreatment can introduce MPs directly into the anaerobic reactors and the number of MPs gradually increased within the limited incubation time. A large number of residual MPs can affect the land use of the digestate [44].


3.4 The role of microbial communities

Fig. 5 illustrates the archaeal abundance at genus level in samples taken at different sampling times under both mesophilic and thermophilic conditions. Under mesophilic conditions (Fig. 5a and b), the three predominant archaeal genera were Methanosaeta, Methanobacterium and a genus belonging to the class Bathyarchaeia. Methanosaeta was present in more than 70 % of all samples (except M40-PBAT-T, 68.5 %), which proportion increased in each sample (except PL2-T) with increasing incubation time. Methanosaeta has been reported to be one of the predominant archaeal genera in the reactors degrading the biodegradable plastics under mesophilic conditions [22,27,8]. Methanosaeta produce the methane via the acetoclastic pathway and it is suggested that the archaea of Bathyarchaeia class are also acetoclastic methanogen [45], indicating that the acetoclastic methanogenesis was the dominant pathway under mesophilic conditions. Under thermophilic conditions (Fig. 5c and d), Methanobacterium accounted for the largest proportion, exceeding 50 % in each sample, followed by Methanosaeta, Methanosarcina, and a genus belonging to the class Bathyarchaeia. On the 60th day of the incubation, the proportion of Methanothermobacter in all samples (except PLA-T) increased by 3–20 times compared to the 25th day. Methanobacterium, Methanosarcina and Methanothermobacter have been repeatedly found to be predominant in anaerobic reactors fed with biodegradable plastics under thermophilic conditions [46,22,8]. Methanobacterium and Methanothermobacter are hydrogenotrophic methanogens, while Methanosarcina can utilize both acetic acid and H_2 [47]. The result indicated that the methane was mainly generated by the hydrogenotrophic pathway under thermophilic conditions.

Under thermophilic conditions ( Fig. 6a and b), Firmicutes, Thermotogota, Desulfobacterota, Synergistota and Chloroflexi were the predominant bacterial phyla. Firmicutes accounted for more than 30 % of all samples, while it took a proportion of more than 50 % in the digestate samples of PBAT and PBAT-T. The genus belonging to the class D8A-2 accounted for the largest proportion of Firmicutes (5.7 % of the sample sequences). The class D8A-2 is syntrophic acetate-oxidizing bacteria (SAOB) that can convert acetate to H_2 [48,49]. Notably, the relative abundance of the genus in the class D8A-2 was higher in the digestate samples of PBAT, PBAT-T and PL1-T on the 25th day (Fig. 6c). For PL1, PBAT components remained after the pretreatment. This fact suggested that the genus in the class D8A-2 may be related to the hydrolysis and utilization of PBAT. Tepidimicrobium was another genus with a large proportion within Firmicutes (5.0 % of sample sequences). Tepidimicrobium xylanilyticum was isolated from an anaerobic digester and was able to grow on a number of substrates such as glucose, cellobiose and various proteinaceous compounds, which were converted to acetate, H_2 and CO_2 [50]. Interestingly, it was reported that T. xylanilyticum cannot utilize starch as a carbohydrate [50], while the relative abundance of Tepidimicrobium in the samples of PL2 and PL2-T (containing starch), was lower than in the samples of other biodegradable plastics. Tseng et al. [51] found that Tepidimicrobium was enriched in a PLA-fed anaerobic digester and converted lactic acid into CO_2 and H_2 for methanogens. They then successfully isolated the T. xylanilyticum strain from the PLA degradation reactor [52]. Tepidimicrobium was also found to be enriched in the anaerobic reactors where different types of biodegradable plastics were digested [27]. The result of this study further demonstrated that Tepidimicrobium may play an important role in the degradation of PLA, PBAT or their blends. Furthermore, for the Desulfitibacter genus, the number of ASVs in the sample of PLA (> 500) were much higher than other samples (< 50). Desulfitibacter is commonly known as sulfate-reducing genus [53]. Lactate is considered to be the most suitable electron donor [54]. Thus, Desulfitibacter can be enriched in the reactor containing PLA through the use of lactate. However, no enrichment of Desulfitibacter was observed in the reactors degrading PLA-T. In addition, Thermacetogenium, SAOB belonging to Firmicutes, can grow on several organic acids and alcohols to generate acetate [55,56]. In this study, it was found to be more abundant in the PLA, PLA-T, and PL1 samples. This suggested that Thermacetogenium might be related to the PLA degradation.

Under thermophilic conditions, the relative abundance of the phylum Thermotogota followed Firmicutes in each sample, whose abundance is much higher in the samples of PL2 and PL2-T (>25 %) than in the other samples (<15 %). This was because the Defluviitoga genus in Thermotogota was higher in the samples of PL2 and PL2-T. Defluviitoga can metabolize sugars to generate acetate, H_2 and CO_2 [57,58]. The enrichment of Defluviitoga in the reactors containing PL2 and PL2-T may be related to the starch degradation. After 25 days of thermophilic incubation, the Coprothermobacterota phylum was more than 5 % in both samples of PLA and PLA-T, while it was less than 1 % in the remaining samples at this time. On the 60th day, the percentage of Coprothermobacterota in the sample of PLA was more than 20 %. This was due to the enrichment of the Coprothermobacter genus in the reactors that degraded PLA. Coprothermobacter contains proteolytic anaerobic thermophilic microbes, which can generate acetate, CO_2 and H_2 [59]. Cazaudehore et al. [60] observed a high abundance of Coprothermobacter in the reactors degrading PLA and PHB. However, since Coprothermobacter was more abundant in the inoculum sample without the biodegradable plastics, they hypothesized that Coprothermobacter was not a specific PHB or PLA degrading bacteria. However, in this study, Coprothermobacter had a very low proportion (ASVs < 10) in the digestate sample without adding the biodegradable plastics at the same sampling time. The proteases, like proteinase K have the ability to hydrolyze PLA [43] and Coprothermobacter has the property of protein hydrolysis [58]. Therefore, it can be assumed that Coprothermobacter was related to the hydrolysis of PLA.


4 Conclusions

The thermo-alkaline pretreatment improved the methane yield of PBAT under the thermophilic condition, while it reduced the methane production of remaining solid fraction of PBAT/PLA plastics because the PLA fraction was dissolved. The enhancement of anaerobic degradation of plastics can be attributed to the reduction of molecular weight and formation of pore structure on the plastic surface, which increased the accessibility of biodegradable plastics by microorganism. Furthermore, the pretreated biodegradable plastics are more likely to form MPs with size predominantly less than 500 µm, while the untreated plastics did not generate MPs during the residence time (15–30 days) of an AD plant. Although the thermo-alkaline pretreatment is demonstrated a promising technology to increase the anaerobic degradability of PBAT, who is considered resistant to the anaerobic conditions, the secondary risk of MPs arising from the thermo-alkaline pretreatment needs to be further investigated. Finally, several bacterial genera exhibited specific degradation for different types of plastics under thermophilic conditions. The functional genes and corresponding metabolic pathways of these bacteria need more studies.


 Environmental implication

Anaerobic digestion of bioplastics will contribute to the energy recovery of waste by producing renewable energy. This work studied the effects of thermo-alkaline pretreatment on poly(butylene adipate-co-terephthalate) (PBAT) and its co-blends, and conducted a quantitative analysis of enhancement of methane yield and the number and size distribution of biodegradable microplastics (MPs) produced during degradation process. We believe this work can guide the practical application of thermos-alkaline pretreatment on bioplastic for bioenergy recovery. Meanwhile, the finding on MPs formation from PBAT/PLA will help to optimize the AD process parameters to completely degrade MPs and reduce the MPs residual in digestate.


 CRediT authorship contribution statement

Rong Nie: Investigation, Writing – original draft. Fan Lü: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Wei Peng: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing. Xiangyu Lu: Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition. Hua Zhang: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Pinjing HE: Funding acquisition, Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.


Appendix A Supporting information

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.jhazmat.2024.134882.


Appendix A Supplementary material

.