TITLE: Peracetic acid pretreatment improves biogas production from anaerobic digestion of sewage sludge by promoting organic matter release, conversion and affecting microbial community


1 Introduction

As a by-product of sewage treatment process, sewage sludge is a multi-component, multi-media, multi-interaction complex system with dual properties of "pollution" and "resource" (Xiang et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2022; Zhu et al., 2022). Anaerobic digestion (AD) is a sustainable biotechnology used to recover energy from the decomposition of organic waste, which is the most efficient way to ecologically dispose of sludge today (Chen et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2023). Nevertheless, the extracellular polymeric substance (EPS) and hard cell walls hinder the decomposition of organic matter by extracellular enzymes (Liu et al., 2023a; Lu et al., 2020). Microorganisms have difficulty utilizing intracellular organic matter, resulting in limited hydrolysis and low digestibility of sludge AD. Various pretreatment methods, including mechanical, physical, biological and chemical pretreatments, have been applied to accelerate the rate limiting step of AD (hydrolysis) and potentially enhance biogas production (Carrere et al., 2016; Khanh Nguyen et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2023b; Tulun and Bilgin, 2019). Among all the investigated pretreatment methods, chemical pretreatment has been proved to be a promising one because it allows for faster and more efficient destruction of complex structured organics (Behera et al., 2014; Lu et al., 2020; Pellera and Gidarakos, 2018).

In recent years, oxidants have gained much interest as chemicals for pretreatment technologies to boost the efficiency and energy recovery of AD. A series of oxidants peroxymonosulfate (PMS), hydrogen peroxide (H_2O_2), calcium peroxide (CaO_2) and potassium permanganate (KMnO_4) have been demonstrated to disrupt the sludge cell walls and EPS, thereby transferring the intracellular organic matter from the solid phase to the liquid phase and increasing its solubility for efficient utilization by the functional microorganisms in AD system (Ling et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2019a; Zheng et al., 2022a). However, catalysts for radical formation are required for PMS and H_2O_2 to decompose the sludge, which increases their processing costs (Ling et al., 2022). Apart from that, PMS and CaO_2 are expensive and therefore their practical application is limited (Ling et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2019). These oxidants or their catalysts might lead to residues with potential environmental risks when applied to sludge treatment. For example, the H_2O_2/Fe^2+ and PMS/Fe^2+ processes may produce secondary pollution with acids or metal ions, as well as residuals of MnO_2 and Mn^2+ in the sludge from the use of KMnO_4 (Shi et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2016; Willhite et al., 2012; Zhao et al., 2021). Therefore, it is meaningful to explore low-cost, efficient and eco-friendly oxidants for pretreatment to enhance AD performance and improve the economic value of sludge.

Peracetic acid (PAA), with high oxidation power (standard reduction potential E_h ^0 = 1.0–1.96 V) and excellent sterilization capacity, has been extensively applied in disinfection, removal of organic contaminants and inactivation of pathogens (da Silva et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2022). Compared to the bond energy of PMS (76 kcal mol^−1) and H_2O_2 (51 kcal mol^−1), PAA possesses a lower O–OH bond dissociation (38 kcal mol^−1) (Ling et al., 2022), therefore the chemical reagents and energy input to activate PAA can be reduced and the process costs can be kept down. It is claimed that PAA is an eco-friendly chemical agent that degrades into non-toxic and easily dissolvable by-products, because its decomposition into H_2O_2 and acetic acid, which again into water, oxygen and carbon dioxide (Sharma et al., 2020). The applications of PAA in sewage sludge treatment were first described by Fraser et al., in 1985 (Fraser et al., 1985). PAA was used for sludge disinfection to destruct pathogens and parasites while producing safe, readily biodegradable and non-toxic residues (Fraser et al., 1985). Additionally, it was found that PAA pretreatment can effectively facilitate sludge solubilization and EPS decomposition (Liu et al., 2020b; Zhang et al., 2016). When PAA was used to condition municipal wastewater sludge, it improved the conductivity of the sludge and effectively prevented the formation of odors, which was attributed to hydroxyl (OH^−) and acetate (CH_3COO^−) ions generated by PAA pretreatment (Luukkonen et al., 2020). Based on these findings, it is feasible to apply PAA pretreatment as a powerful, economical and eco-friendly approach to promote energy recovery from sludge AD. Previous study showed that PAA pretreatment is capable of improving biogas production of sludge AD (Appels et al., 2011), but information about the potential mechanisms of how PAA pretreatment affect biogas production from sludge AD is lacking. It is known that sludge AD is a multi-step microbial process involving multiple intermediate metabolites, with hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis, and methanogenesis all being accomplished by different species of microorganisms (Chen et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2019). However, the microbial community dynamics in sludge AD pretreated with PAA are “black-boxes”, especially some functional microorganisms that play important roles in AD process, which are poorly understood.

The main purposes of this study are therefore to explore the effects of PAA pretreatment on sludge AD and to explain the underlying mechanisms of how PAA pretreatment affects biogas production through both physicochemical and microbial analyses. First, to elucidate the effects of PAA pretreatment on the performance of sludge AD, the variations of biogas production and intermediate metabolites driven by functional microorganisms in each anaerobic reactor were analyzed and compared. Then, the underlying mechanism of PAA pretreatment on sludge decomposition was explored from the aspects of the release and conversion of organic matter and the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by PAA. Finally, the changes of microbial community in anaerobic reactors pretreated with different dosages of PAA and the correlation between the functional microorganisms and environment variables were clarified. This study extends the insight that the mechanisms of oxidants affect the performance of sludge AD system.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Materials sources

The activated sludge and dewatered sludge used in this study were both collected from a municipal wastewater treatment plant in Changsha, China. The details of obtaining seed sludge and feed sludge can be found in Text S1. The main characteristics of seed sludge and feed sludge were listed in Table S1. Peracetic acid (10 % PAA, 14% H_2O_2 and 25% acetic acid by weight) was obtained from Huihong Reagent Co., Ltd. (Hunan, China).


2.2 Pretreatment conditions and anaerobic reactors set-up

Feed sludge was pretreated with PAA at concentrations of 0 (as the control), 1, 2, 3 and 4 mM/g VS (volatile solids). The feed sludge pretreated with PAA was obtained by stirring the sludge with a magnetic stirrer at 450 rpm for 30 min at 25 °C after the addition of PAA. Glass containers with 5 L were used as anaerobic reactors, each reactor with a working volume of 2.7 L containing 1.8 L of seed sludge and 0.9 L of feed sludge (pretreated sludge). Each reactor was aerated N_2 gas for 20 min to provide an anaerobic environment, tightly sealed with a rubber stopper and incubated in a constant temperature water bath at 35 ± 1 °C. An electronic water-bath was used to maintain the operating temperature of reactors. The daily biogas production was measured by the drainage method. The AD experimental set-up was shown in Fig. S1. The anaerobic reactors were divided into five groups at different PAA dosages and three parallel reactors were set up in each group.


2.3 Analytical methods

Total solids (TS), volatile solids (VS), pH, soluble chemical oxygen demand (SCOD), soluble protein and soluble carbohydrate were measured according to the Standard Methods (Eaton et al., 1995). The three-dimensional excitation-emission matrix (3-DEEM) fluorescence spectroscopy of dissolved organic matter (DOM) were acquired by a fluorescence spectrophotometer (F-4600, Hitachi, Japan). Reactive oxygen species (ROS) (HO•, superoxide radical (O_2 ^−•), singlet oxygen (^1O_2) and acetylperoxyl radical (CH_3C(O)OO•)) were detected by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR, Bruker-A300 spectrometer, Germany). DMPO (5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide) was used as HO•, O_2 ^−• and CH_3C(O)OO• trapping reagents, TMPO (4-oxo-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine) was used as a capture reagent for ^1O_2. In order to identify CH_3C(O)OO•, EPR tests on a PAA pretreated sludge system was performed in TBA (tert-butanol) solution (Huang et al., 2023). Determination of volatile fatty acids (VFAs) by a gas chromatograph (HP5890, USA).


2.4 Kinetic models

Cone model and Modified Gompertz model were selected to predict the biogas production potential and analyze the effects of pretreatment with different PAA dosages on kinetic parameters of AD systems (Text S2).


2.5 Microbial community analysis

The digested sludge from each anaerobic reactor was sampled on days 0, 5, 19 and 26, respectively. Details of the analysis of the microbial community and Illumina HiSeq sequencing are provided in Text S3. The sequencing raw data were submitted to NCBI with the submission ID SUB12199654.


2.6 Statistical analysis

Drawing graphs and the kinetic models were conducted using OriginPro 9.0 software. The heatmap was performed with Hemi 1.0 software. Redundancy analysis (RDA) was performed with Canoco 5.0 software. Variation partitioning analysis (VPA) was analyzed on the Biozeron Cloud Platform (http://www.cloud.biomicroclass.com/CloudPlatform).


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Biogas production from sludge AD pretreated with different PAA dosages

The daily biogas production and cumulative biogas yields of five groups displayed in Fig. 1 . When PAA at 0–3 mM/g VS, the daily biogas production of anaerobic reactors hardly increased until day 3, and the daily biogas production of reactors pretreated with 4 mM/g VS of PAA increased after day 2 (Fig. 1(a)). On day 6, the daily biogas production peaked in all anaerobic reactors, which were 37.62 (0 mM/g VS), 45.41 (1 mM/g VS), 48.91 (2 mM/g VS), 47.33 (3 mM/g VS) and 46.00 (4 mM/g VS) mL/g VS, respectively. All reactors pretreated with PAA showed a higher maximum daily biogas production than the control group. From Fig. 1(b), the cumulative biogas yields of reactors pretreated with 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4 mM/g VS of PAA were 212.29, 246.49, 297.94, 288.95 and 274.97 mL/g VS, respectively. When the PAA pretreatment was at 2 mM/g VS, the cumulative biogas yield increased by 40.35% compared to the control. Additionally, it should be noted that the cumulative biogas production of the reactors pretreated with PAA was not significantly higher than the control until day 7. Under pretreatment condition with PAA of 4 mM/g VS, the cumulative biogas production of the reactors was even lower than the control for the first 7 days. It is possible that PAA pretreatment prolonged the lag time of sludge AD. Nevertheless, PAA pretreatment increased biogas production from sludge AD, with maximum biogas yield at PAA dosage of 2 mM/g VS in this study. As a chemical pretreatment method, PAA pretreatment would inevitably increase the treatment cost of AD of sludge. However, the treatment cost of PAA pretreated sludge is relatively low compared to other oxidants (Table S2). Therefore, it is economical and feasible to utilize PAA pretreatment to enhance biogas production from AD of sludge.


3.2 Effects of PAA pretreatment on intermediate metabolites in AD process

In Fig. 2 (a) and (b), when digestion time was from 0 to 26 days, in anaerobic reactors pretreated with 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4 mg/L PAA, the soluble protein concentrations decreased from 566.55, 665.78, 724.03, 753.33 and 790.03 mg/L to 251.60, 262.18, 253.34, 242.26 and 244.44 mg/L, respectively, and the soluble carbohydrate concentrations decreased from 137.18, 149.55, 170.57, 171.0 and 177.88 mg/L to 63.00, 65.61, 63.31, 72.24 and 67.88 mg/L, respectively. The degradation efficiency of soluble protein and carbohydrate in reactors pretreated with PAA was higher than the control. The above findings implied that the improvement in biogas production is closely related to the positive effect of PAA pretreatment on sludge hydrolysis and conversion of soluble proteins and carbohydrates.

There is a close connection between VFAs and biogas generation in anaerobic reactors (Chen et al., 2020). From Fig. 2(c)–(g), it is obvious that the concentration of VFAs in the reactors pretreated with PAA was much higher than that of the control, demonstrating the promotion effect of PAA pretreatment on VFAs production. When anaerobic reactors were started, acetic acid was the predominant VFA in the reactors pretreated with 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4 mM/g VS of PAA at concentrations of 48.54, 71.47, 78.28, 81.85 and 165.91 mg/L, respectively. This suggested that the higher biogas production obtained from the PAA pretreatment compared to the control, which was related to the high production of VFAs. However, high concentrations of VFAs were detrimental to some anaerobic microorganisms, resulting in increased soluble organic matter that could not be converted into additional biogas (Wang et al., 2019b). The maximum VFAs were detected on day 1 in anaerobic reactors pretreated with 0 and 1 mM/g VS PAA and on day 3 in anaerobic reactors pretreated with 2, 3 and 4 mM/g VS of PAA, being in accordance with the low biogas production determined (Fig. 1). The trend of VFAs depletion was consistent with the increase in daily biogas production. In anaerobic reactors pretreated with PAA at 3 and 4 mM/g VS, propionic acid became the predominant VFA in reactors on day 12. Previous study revealed that the abundance of methanogens consuming acetic acid is influenced by the accumulation of propionic acid and ultimately biogas production is reduced (Han et al., 2020).

The results in Fig. 1 indicated that the biogas production of the reactors pretreated with PAA showed an advantage in biogas production after day 7, and the biogas production decreased when the PAA dosage exceeded 2 mM/g VS. According to Fig. 2, the reason might be that the microorganisms in the sludge need to adapt to the new environment after PAA pretreatment as the contents of soluble organic matter and VFAs in the sludge increases. Meanwhile, the high concentration of PAA with strong bactericidal activity and the negative effects of high concentration of VFAs on anaerobic microorganisms, which affects the microbial metabolic processes in the system (Ao et al., 2021; Li et al., 2022a). Coupled with the inhibition of propionic acid accumulation, the biogas yield at PAA concentration of 3 and 4 mM/g VS was lower than that at PAA concentration of 2 mM/g.


3.3 Kinetic analysis of cumulative biogas production

To further understand the effect of PAA pretreatment on AD, these experimental data were described through Cone model and Modified Gompertz model. According to Table 1 and Table 2 , biogas production of the five groups were well fitted with Cone model and Modified Gompertz model, and the determination coefficient (R^2) were both >0.99. As shown in Table 1, P_m (maximum biogas production) first increases with increasing PAA dosage, peaks at 2 mM/g VS, and then gradually decreases. The k value (hydrolysis rate constant) of the anaerobic reactors pretreated with 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4 mM/g VS of PAA was 0.2159, 0.1860, 0.1826, 0.1734 and 0.1537, respectively. This observation indicated that PAA pretreatment obtained smaller k values in the AD systems compared to the control, and that k values decrease with increasing PAA addition. The n value (shape factor) in Table 1 further demonstrated that there was a lag period in the AD process. From Table 2, the R_m (maximum biogas production rate) of the anaerobic reactors pretreated with 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4 mM/g VS of PAA were 30.96, 34.41, 39.85, 39.04 and 39.17 mL/g VS/d, respectively. In this study, the R_m of PAA pretreated reactors were higher than that of the control. The highest R_m was observed at the PAA dosage of 2 mM/g VS, which was 28.71% higher than that of the control. In addition, the λ value (lag phase) of the anaerobic reactors pretreated with 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4 mM/g VS PAA were 1.20, 1.78, 1.71, 2.04 and 2.97 days, respectively. Combined with the results of Fig. 2, the concentrations of soluble organic matter and VFAs were higher in the PAA pretreated anaerobic reactors than in the control. Microorganisms needed some time to adapt to the change of sludge conditions after PAA pretreatment so it prolonged the lag period of AD. Nonetheless, PAA pretreatment was able to obtain a significantly higher maximum biogas production potential than the control.


3.4 Potential mechanisms of how PAA pretreatment promotes biogas production


3.4.1 PAA pretreatment promotes sludge disintegration and solubilization

The SCOD, soluble protein and carbohydrate are measures of organic matter solubility and are commonly used to demonstrate sludge disintegration and solubilization (Appels et al., 2011; Zheng et al., 2022b). As shown in Fig. 3 (a), when the dosage of PAA was elevated from 0 to 4 mM/g VS, the concentration of SCOD increased sequentially from 6155 to 12,915 mg/L. Compared with the control, PAA pretreatment with 1, 2, 3, 4 mM/g VS increased the concentration of SCOD by 5.69%, 39.48%, 60.60%, and 109.83%, respectively. In Fig. 3(b), soluble protein and carbohydrate in the supernatant increased from 403.96 to 112.72 mg/L to 1064.65 and 166.95 mg/L as the dosage of PAA was elevated from 0 to 4 mM/g VS. The considerable increase of these organic contents proved that the PAA pretreatment technology could effectively promote sludge disintegration and release a great number of organic matters from the sludge. These released organic matter are available to the functional microorganisms involved in subsequent AD, thus obtaining the result in Fig. 1 that the biogas production from AD of sludge after PAA pretreatment was significantly higher than that of the control.

Different types of DOM contain specific fluorescent groups, fluorescence peak positions and fluorescence intensities, thus 3-DEEM spectra was adopted to further characterize the degradability of DOM (Zhang et al., 2020). According to Fig. 3(c), the 3-DEEM spectra was segmented into five regions. Region I and IV were biodegradable substances in DOM (tyrosine-like proteins and soluble microbial byproduct-like substances); Region II, III and V were non-biodegradable substances in DOM (tryptophan-like proteins, fulvic acid-like substances and humic acid-like substances) (Li et al., 2022b). Notably, the fluorescence in Regions I - V of sludge samples after PAA pretreatment was significantly weaker than that of the control. The fluorescence reduced sequentially as the dosage of PAA increased from 1 mM/g VS to 4 mM/g VS. This implied that PAA pretreatment significantly facilitated the conversion of organic matter, which was one of the important reasons why PAA pretreatment improved biogas production of AD.

The free amino acids in the sludge samples mainly originated from the release of cell lysis, protein hydrolysis and peptide bond cleavage by exoenzymes (Hunter et al., 2021). Fig. 3(d) shows the heatmap of the types and concentrations of free amino acid detected in the five groups. 10 kinds of free amino acids were detected in the control group and 17 kinds of free amino acids were detected in the experimental groups. The PAA pretreated sludge samples contained higher levels of most free amino acids than the control, with the most significant change in glutamic acid. With the dosage of PAA was elevated from 0 to 4 mM/g VS, the content of glutamic acid increased from 0 to 8.468 mg/L. However, the contents of alanine and isoleucine decreased with the increase of PAA dosage. There are researches suggested that glutamic acid is a key cell structure component and central metabolite and the amino acids may be oxidized by ROS generated by PAA (Du et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2020b). The increase of the type and content of free amino acid convincingly reflected the efficient degradation of proteins in sludge pretreated with PAA. In summary, PAA pretreatment accelerated the release of organic matter and induced the oxidation of macromolecular organic matter into small molecule compounds.


3.4.2 Underlying mechanisms of PAA pretreatment on sludge solubilization

PAA is a mixture formed by reacting acetic acid (CH_3C(O)OH) with H_2O_2 in the presence of a catalyst (e.g. sulfuric acid (H_2SO_4)) (Eq. (1)) (Wang et al., 2020). Previous studies have demonstrated that pretreatment with PAA can effectively break down and destroy EPS and cells of waste activated sludge through the generation of ROS (the dissociation of the organic peroxide bond) (Liu et al., 2020b, 2022). Fig. 3(e) illustrated that some ROS were generated after the addition of PAA, such as HO•, O_2 ^−•, ^1O_2 and CH_3C(O)OO•. These ROS are involved in important oxidation reactions that promote sludge disintegration and the release and degradation of organic matter from the sludge. Among the four stages of AD (hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis and methanogenesis), the hydrolysis is recognized as the rate-limiting stage that leads to low efficiency of AD. It is proposed that EPS and cell walls in sludge can limit the utilization of organic matter by hydrolytic enzymes and microorganisms (Lu et al., 2020). The EPS of sludge contains mainly proteins, carbohydrates and humic substances, which are viewed as the key factor hindering sludge decomposition (Liu et al., 2023b). Based on the results of soluble organic matter concentration, 3D-EEM spectra and free amino acid analysis in this study, the generation of HO•, O_2 ^−•, ^1O_2 and CH_3C(O)OO• caused the destruction of sludge cell structure and the oxidative decomposition of EPS. Under the action of HO•, O_2 ^−•, ^1O_2 and CH_3C(O)OO•, the concentration of soluble organic matter in the sludge increased while the content of humic acid-like substances decreased, and proteins were degraded to amino acids. The conversion of organic matter was promoted, thus increasing the biogas production of sludge AD. The complex composition in sewage sludge and the ability of PAA to generate ROS by energy transfer or electron transfer activation have been reported based on extensive literature, and possible pathways to generate ROS in PAA pretreatment experiments was proposed (Text S4) (Ao et al., 2021). However, more efforts are needed in the future to elucidate how ROS are generated and to identify the ROS that play most dominant role during PAA pretreatment of sludge. FORMULA: CH 3 C ( O ) OH + H 2 O 2 → H 2 SO 4 CH 3 C ( O ) OOH + H 2 O


3.5 Changes of microbial community in response to PAA pretreatment in AD


3.5.1 Bacterial community

In order to more deeply analyze the mechanism of sludge AD affected by PAA pretreatment from the microbial perspective, the changes of five groups of microbial communities were investigated by 16S rRNA sequencing. Shannon index and Simpson index were selected to reflect the diversity of microbial community. In this study, each anaerobic reactor pretreated with PAA at the beginning of AD exhibited a lower bacterial Shannon index and a higher bacterial Simpson index than the blank group (Fig. S2(a) and Fig. S2(b)). It is obvious that PAA pretreatment could reduce bacterial diversity in AD systems, indicating that PAA is potentially toxic to microorganisms. Nevertheless, microorganisms were able to gradually adapt and multiply their metabolism during AD. At the late stage of AD, the result of higher bacterial diversity in the experimental group than in the blank group was obtained. Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) was applied to assess the differences in microbial community composition between anaerobic reactors (Chen et al., 2020). It can be observed that there were significant differences in the bacterial composition in the five reactors (Fig. S3(a)).

As shown in Fig. 4 (a), Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, Chloroflexi, Bacteroidota and Proteobacteria were the dominant phyla of bacterial communities in all anaerobic reactors. These five phyla were core bacteria during hydrolysis and acidogenesis (Duan et al., 2021). Firmicutes and Actinobacteria could hydrolyze various macromolecular organic compounds to synthesize VFAs and hydrogen by secreting extracellular enzymes (Li et al., 2022a; Zhou et al., 2022). The relative abundance of Firmicutes in anaerobic reactors pretreated with PAA gradually increased with the AD reaction from day 0 to day 5 and was higher than the control except for reactor with PAA concentration of 1 mM/g VS. At the beginning of AD, the relative abundance of Actinobacteria in five reactors was 13.73% (0 mM/g VS),17.57% (1 mM/g VS), 21.79% (2 mM/g VS), 29.88% (3 mM/g VS), 22.29% (4 mM/g VS), respectively. These results further proved that PAA pretreatment can effectively improve hydrolysis efficiency and acid production in acidogenesis and acetogenesis and explained the reasons at the microbiological level. Bacteroidota have positive effects on cell lysis and the degradation of released organic matters in AD system (Chen et al., 2020). Pretreatment with PAA at 3 and 4 mM/g VS reduced the relative abundance of Bacteroidota by 5.82% and 5.92% compared to the control. This observation explained the lower biogas production in anaerobic reactors pretreated with PAA at 3 and 4 mM/g VS compared to PAA at 1 and 2 mM/g VS. Although the pretreatment with high concentration of PAA resulted in more leaching of organic matter available to microorganisms, the inactivation of some functional microorganisms (e.g., Bacteroidota) by high concentration of PAA led to a decrease in biogas production. Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria include some important pathogens, and the relative abundance of these two phyla was reduced in the early or mid-late stages of AD after pretreatment with PAA. Chloroflexi was confirmed to be involved in the conversion of soluble protein and carbohydrate (Chen et al., 2020). The relative abundance of Chloroflexi did not vary significantly in these reactors during AD process. Chloroflexi has a high probability of containing many functional microorganisms that are highly adaptable and not susceptible to external environmental influences (Narsing Rao et al., 2022). During the first three days of AD, there was no increase in daily biogas production in the PAA pretreated anaerobic reactors but there was an overall increasing trend in the concentration of VFAs. AD was in the steps of hydrolysis, acidogenesis and acetogenesis, where Firmicutes, Actinobacteria and Bacteroidota contain anaerobic bacteria that first degraded proteins and carbohydrates into amino acids and monosaccharides, which were further converted into organic substances such as small molecules of organic acids, alcohols, VFAs and hydrogen.

The evolution of bacterial community at the genus level is shown in Fig. 4(b). Hydrogenispora, Mycobacterium, norank_f__JG30-KF-CM45, Paraclostridium, Lutispora, Longivirga, Proteiniclasticum, Peptostreptococcus and norank_f__Caloramatoraceae were functional bacterial genera associated with hydrolysis in five groups. On day 0, Hydrogenispora, Mycobacterium, norank_f__JG30-KF-CM45 and Longivirga were all enriched in the anaerobic reactors pretreated with PAA compared to the control, and their abundance increased with increasing dosage of PAA. In connection with Fig. 3(d), the content of amino acids in sludge was significantly increased by PAA pretreatment, especially glutamic acid. According to previous study, glutamic acid is readily utilized for conversion by anaerobic fermentation bacteria (Xia et al., 2015). Therefore, PAA pretreatment can effectively strengthen sludge AD for biogas production. Hydrogenispora, Mycobacterium and Lutispora play a critical role in carbohydrate decomposition and utilization, and Hydrogenispora could further produce ethanol and hydrogen (Ji et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022b). In this study, Hydrogenispora was one of the most dominant genera throughout the experiment, while Mycobacterium, Lutispora and Longivirga were mainly enriched during the hydrolysis and acidogenesis phases and decreased during the later stages of AD. Proteiniclasticum and norank_f__Caloramatoraceae were dropped when the addition of PAA exceeded 2 mM/g VS compared to the control, and these two genera belong to hydrolytic and fermentative bacteria (Lu et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2022a). It reflected that the inhibitory effect of high concentrations of PAA on the activity of these genera. Tetrasphaera, Romboutsia, Clostridium_sensu_stricto_13, Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1, norank_f__W27, Sedimentibacter, Syntrophomonas and Proteiniphilum were the genera found to be associated with the VFAs and hydrogen production in the five groups. It can be observed that PAA pretreatment facilitated an increase in the abundance of these genera, but the abundance of norank_f__W27 and Proteiniphilum was significantly lower than the other three groups at PAA concentrations of 3 and 4 mM/g VS. This suggested that PAA pretreatment improved the production of VFAs, thus providing more available substrate for subsequent biogas production. However, high concentrations of PAA (3 and 4 mM/g VS) were detrimental to some acidogenic and acetogenic genera. Romboutsia was another the most dominant genera throughout the experiment in all anaerobic reactors. Genus Romboutsia was reported to have the ability to metabolize biodegradable organic substrates to produce VFAs and hydrogen (Liu et al., 2020a). Also, various functional bacteria (e. g., Clostridium_sensu_stricto_13, Clostridium_sensu_stricto_1, Sedimentibacter and Syntrophomonas) that participated in VFAs and hydrogen production were enriched in digesters on days 5, 19 and 26 (Ji et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2022b).


3.5.2 Archaeal community

In terms of archaeal community, Shannon indexes were higher and Simpson indexes were lower than that of the control in the anaerobic reactor pretreated with 1 mM/g PAA and 4 mM/g PAA at the beginning of sludge AD. In reactors pretreated with 2 and 3 mM/g VS of PAA, lower Shannon indexes and higher Simpson indexes than the control were obtained at the beginning of sludge AD (Fig. S2(c) and Fig. S2(d)). At the late stage of AD, the archaeal diversity of the experimental groups was lower than that of the control, implying that PAA pretreatment has a negative impact on the diversity of archaeal communities in the sludge AD system. This is inconsistent with the biogas production results, and the reason for this situation is most likely the superior adaptation of the functional archaea to PAA. Meanwhile, there are significant differences in archaeal composition among the five groups (Fig. S3(b)). As presented in Fig. 5 (a), Euryarchaeota and Halobacterota were the two dominant archaeal phyla in these anaerobic reactors, both of which are associated with methanogenesis (Zeng et al., 2021). Halobacterota are methanogenic archaea that convert substrates such as hydrogen, carbon dioxide, methyl compounds (formate, methanol, methylamine, etc.), and VFAs to methane (Zhang et al., 2022a). On day 0, the relative abundance of Halobacterota increased from 11.51% to 21.47% when the PAA level gradually reached 4 mM/g VS. As the AD reaction proceeded, Halobacterota was enriched in these reactors. On day 26, with the increase of PAA from 0 to 4 mM/g VS, the relative abundance of Halobacterota in the supernatant increased from 30.68% to 48.76%. Biogas production increased substantially in all five groups after day 3, peaking on day 6. A significant increase of relative abundance of Halobacterota could be observed in anaerobic reactors pretreated with PAA, which played the most dominant role in the phase of increased biogas production.

The variation of archaeal community at the genus level in five groups during AD was presented in Fig. 5(b). Methanobacterium and Methanosarcina were the two most dominant genera in all anaerobic reactors. Methanosarcina and Methanosaeta are considered as acetoclastic and hydrogenotrophic methanogens (Blasco et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2022). Compared with the control, the abundance of Methanosarcina and Methanosaet in anaerobic reactors pretreated with PAA was higher. It is noteworthy that Methanosarcina was enriched in all five different reactors during AD process. On day 26, the relative abundance of Methanosarcina in five groups was 24.28% (0 mM/g VS), 30.73% (1 mM/g VS), 35.11% (2 mM/g VS), 42.98% (3 mM/g VS) and 45.78% (4 mM/g VS), respectively. This could be attribute to the enrichment of acetoclastic methanogens stimulated by the increase of VFAs in anaerobic reactors with PAA pretreated. During the methanogenesis of AD, Methanobacterium, Methanosarcina and Methanosaeta converted organic substrates (including VFAs, hydrogen and carbon dioxide) into methane, resulting in increased biogas yield (Kumar et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022a). Methanobrevibacter and Methanosphaera are hydrogenotrophic and methylotrophic methanogens, but they have also been shown to be potential pathogens (Sogodogo et al., 2019). Lower abundance of these two archaeal genera than the control was obtained in the PAA-pretreated anaerobic reactors, especially Methanosphaera was almost removed at the late stage of AD.

From what has been discussed above, it can be concluded that PAA pretreatment was beneficial to enrich the functional microorganisms involved in generation and conversion of VFAs to biogas, as well as the removal of some potential pathogens. Moreover, the high concentration of PAA pretreatment was prone to damage some microorganisms associated with hydrolysis and acidogenesis. The enrichment of functional microorganisms is one of the mechanisms by which PAA pretreatment improved the AD performance of sludge (Fig. 1). The microbial analysis also explained why biogas production was reduced in sludge pretreated with 3 and 4 mM/g VS of PAA with higher organic matter concentrations than 2 mM/g VS of PAA (Figs. 1 and 3 (a) and (b)).


3.6 Relationships between functional microorganisms and environment variables

Redundancy analysis (RDA) and variation partitioning analysis (VPA) were used with the aim of exploring the relationships between functional microorganisms and environment variables in five groups. A total of 12 functional microorganisms including 8 functional bacterial genera and 4 functional archaeal genera, and 6 environment variables were selected for the RDA. According to Fig. 6 (a), the first and the second ordination axes explained 52.93% and 11.40% of the microbial community changes, respectively. These environment variables were mainly divided into two areas. Intermediate metabolites (soluble carbohydrate, soluble protein, SCOD and VFAs) were distributed in one area, and cumulative biogas production and pH were distributed in another area. In Fig. 6(b), environment variables were divided into three groups: intermediate metabolites, cumulative biogas production, and pH. Intermediate metabolites, cumulative biogas production and pH explained 16%, 21% and 1% of the variation in functional microbial community composition, respectively, and these three environmental variable groups together explained 8% of the variation in functional microbial community composition. Cumulative biogas production increased with the consumption of intermediate metabolites during AD, thus cumulative biogas production is inversely proportional to the intermediate metabolites in the RDA. Functional microorganisms were significantly correlated with intermediate metabolites and accumulated biogas production. Methanobacterium, Methanosaeta and Methanobrevibacter showed positive response to intermediate metabolites, and there was a positive correlation between Methanosarcina and cumulative biogas production, proving these microorganisms conduced to convert intermediate metabolites into biogas. Tetrasphaera, norank_f__JG30-KF-CM45, Mycobacterium and Romboutsia were strongly associated with intermediate metabolites, which played an important role in the conversion of intermediate metabolites.


4 Conclusions

In this study, the contribution of PAA pretreatment to the sludge AD system was evaluated and the potential mechanisms of how PAA pretreatment enhanced biogas production in AD systems were investigated. The main conclusions are:(1) It was demonstrated that PAA pretreatment effectively improved biogas production in sludge AD systems. The cumulative biogas production increased by 40.35% at 2 mM/g VS PAA pretreatment compared to the control. (2) PAA pretreatment promoted the conversion of organic matter to biogas. In the sludge AD systems, the consumption of soluble proteins, soluble carbohydrates and VFAs observably enhanced after PAA pretreatment. (3) PAA pretreatment facilitated sludge breakdown as well as the release and degradation of organic matter through the generation of ROS (HO•, O_2 ^−•, ^1O_2 and CH_3C(O)OO•), and in particular accelerated protein degrades into amino acids. PAA pretreatment provided more soluble organic matter that is more conducive to microbial utilization for subsequent biogas production. (4) Some functional microorganisms associated with hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis as well as methanogenesis, including Hydrogenispora, Romboutsia, Longivirga, Methanosarcina, Methanosaet, etc, were significantly enriched in anaerobic reactors pretreated with PAA. However, pretreatment with high concentrations of PAA (3 and 4 mM/g VS) showed some extents of inhibition of some acidogenic and acetogenic genera, such as norank_f__W27 and Proteiniphilum. Furthermore, functional microorganisms were significantly correlated with intermediate metabolites and cumulative biogas production.


 Funding/acknowledgements

The study was financially supported by the Science and Technology Innovation Program of Hunan Province (grant number: 2021RC2100) and the Natural Science Foundation of Hunan Province (grant number: 2022JJ40211).


 CRediT authorship contribution statement

Wanying Ren: Conceptualization, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Writing – original draft. Yanru Zhang: Funding acquisition, Writing – original draft. Xiaoping Liu: Methodology, Writing – review & editing. Shanhong Li: Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Hui Li: Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Yunbo Zhai: Formal analysis, Writing – review & editing, Supervision.


Appendix A Supplementary data

The following is the Supplementary data to this article:


Appendix A Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2023.119427.