TITLE: Evaluation of hydrothermal pretreatment for biological treatment of lignocellulosic feedstock (pepper plant and eggplant)


1 Introduction

The use of renewable energy sources is a critical issue worldwide due to the serious negative environmental consequences of using fossil fuels and the future depletion of these fuels. In this regard, biomass has become one of the most promising markets for renewable energy sources.

Agriculture is one of the major sources for the production of biomass. After the harvesting of crops, plant residues consisting mainly of stems, leaves and some fruits remain. It is important that these plant residues are managed properly, since uncontrolled incineration has negative effects on the environment, such as air pollution and loss of resources, and the abandonment of these residues can lead to the spread of diseases and pests and the contamination of soil and aquifers, among others (Moreno et al., 2015). However, the plant residues generated after harvesting also provide an accessible source of renewable energy (Anjum et al., 2016), as this biomass source is a substrate capable of being biodegraded. Anaerobic digestion (AD) is an alternative technology to improve the management of this organic waste and recover energy. AD is of interest for these residues since methane is produced from the lignocellulosic wastes, with the consequent economic and environmental benefits (Kumari and Singh, 2018; Chandra et al., 2012).

Anaerobic digestion is considered a viable and mature technology. The benefits of this technology include the recovery of bioenergy, the reduction in environmental pollution and the production of organic fertilizer from the digested residues. The type and structure of substrates also affect the efficiency of biogas production. Organic materials are mainly composed of carbohydrates, proteins and lipids, which can be degraded to simpler compounds by microorganisms in four stages: hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis and methanogenesis (Deublein, 2008).

However, this type of lignocellulosic biomass (LB) has the disadvantage that it is not easily biodegradable by anaerobic microorganisms because the biodegradable organic matter remains trapped in the lignocellulosic structure (Mosier et al., 2005). Lignocellulose is composed of cellulose (40–50%), hemicellulose (25–35%) and lignin (15–20%), which are organized in a complex arrangement and vary according to the type of plant (Us and Perendeci, 2012).

Although plant remains have traditionally been managed by composting and used for cattle feed, this alternative is becomes increasingly difficult due to the intensification of agricultural production. In Campo de Dalías (Almería, Spain), this is due to two fundamental reasons. Firstly, the rapid growth of surface area dedicated to greenhouse crops, which has increased from 0 ha to 16,000 in 30 years. The annual horticultural production in this area of Spain is 2.5 million tons (pepper, eggplant, tomato, cucumber, green beans, marrow, melon and watermelon); a figure that represents 5% of the total production in the European Union and 21% of the production in Spain (Parra, 2008). Secondly, the amount of waste generated in this area has also increased to 380,000 tons per year. Pepper and eggplant crops are considered to produce the most vegetable waste together with tomato plant. Furthermore, it is worth noting that these crops coincide geographically and temporarily (Consejería de Agricultura, Pesca y Desarrollo Rural, Consejería de Medio Ambiente y Ordenación del Territorio, Junta de Andalucía, 2016).

As mentioned above, plant residues are limited by the recalcitrance of the biomass. The existence of lignin and hemicellulose creates obstacles to protect the cellulose from degradation by microorganisms. Lignin cannot be used during AD and the existence of lignin not only provides a physical barrier, but also inactivates the cellulose by irreversible absorption (Kim et al., 2015; Lim and Wang, 2013). The elimination of lignin or hemicellulose can increase the digestibility of cellulose (Gu et al., 2015). Therefore, an appropriate pretreatment prior to AD might be necessary to release cellulose from the protection of the lignin and hemicellulose, and thus achieve a higher rate of biogas production and substrate degradation (Monlau et al., 2014). Moreover, pretreatment modifies the size, structure and chemical composition of biomass (Nissila et al., 2014).

Different pretreatment methods, including biological, hydrothermal, mechanical and chemical processes or a combination of these methods, have been suggested to improve solids reduction, enzyme accessibility to cellulosic fibers and biogas production from substrate solids (Bougrier et al., 2008; Tanaka et al., 1997). These techniques generally require the addition of reagents or additional energy, which is more costly (Lim and Wang, 2013). The overall performance and viability of these techniques depend on a wide range of factors in addition to energy use and performance (Carrere et al., 2010).

The methods used to pretreat the substrate are intended to promote and improve the hydrolysis of the high molecular compounds to readily biodegradable constituents and to increase the yields of anaerobic digestion products. The hydrolysis step in the AD of the solid substrates is generally considered to be a speed limiting step (Li et al., 2017). However, hydrothermal pretreatment appears to be efficient in terms of solubilization (Bougrier et al., 2008) and has been shown to decompose the lignocellulosic walls and hence improve LB biodegradability (Hendriks and Zeeman, 2009; Mosier et al., 2005) so that it can be used in AD.

Studies on the pretreatment of lignocellulosic waste have shown that more research is needed to improve its applicability, due to the results depend on the type of pretreatment and the characteristics of the lignocellulosic substrates (Kumari and Singh, 2018; Pellera and Gidarakos, 2017; Pecorini et al., 2016). The main objective of this study is to evaluate the effect of hydrothermal pretreatment at 120 °C and different times to increase the solubility of nutrients from abundant lignocellulosic substrates, such as pepper and eggplant, in order to improve their aerobic biodegradability, AD and co-digestion. Pepper and eggplant are two important crops in terms of generating vegetable waste within greenhouse cultivation and their crop coincide geographically and temporarily. The management of this waste by anaerobic co-digestion would enable the development of a circular economy for these crops through the recovery of the nutrients in the digestate and energy in the biogas.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Chemical analyses

The following components were analyzed in the raw materials used as substrates before pretreatment: total solids (TS, g/kg), fixed solids (FS, g/kg), volatile solids (VS, g/kg), total chemical oxygen demand (TCOD, mg O_2/kg), total Kjeldhal nitrogen (TKN, mg/kg) and total phosphorus (TP, mg/kg). The analyses were carried out according to the Standard Methods of the American Public Health Association (APHA, 1989). Metal content (HCl digestion) was determined by Xame photometry (Standard operating procedure manual, 1995) with a Perkin–Elmer Analyst 300 atomic absorption spectrophotometer.

To evaluate the pretreatment, total organic carbon (TOC, g C/kg) and soluble total nitrogen (STN, g N/kg) were monitored over time and analyzed using a Shimadzu TOC-VCPH combustion/nondispersive infrared analyzer.

Additionally, the following parameters were determined in the effluents after each load of the anaerobic digesters: pH, TS (mg/kg), FS (mg/kg), VS (mg/kg), TOC (mg/L), N-NH 4 + (mg/L), alkalinity (Alk, mg CaCO_3/L), and volatile acidity (VA, mg CH_3COOH/L). All analyses were carried out in accordance with the Standard Methods of the APHA.

For the structural analysis of the raw material and the pretreated substrates, Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was used. The FTIR analysis of the samples was measured using a Perkin Elmer Spectrum TwoTM instrument (Massachusetts, USA) equipped with an attenuated total reflectance (ATR) module. The spectra were recorded in a range of 4000 cm^−1 to 450 cm^−1 with a resolution of 4 cm^−1. Twenty scans were performed in the described range and the profile and structural changes in the solid fraction of the evaluated samples were obtained.


2.2 Substrates

To carry out this study, the remains of pepper plant (Capsicum sp.) and eggplant (Solanum melongena) harvested after one productive cycle were used as raw material. Due to the high demand for these plants, they are usually grown in greenhouses and produce a large amount of residues after harvesting. Greenhouses usually generate 25–37 tons of pepper plant residues per hectare and 25–44 tons of eggplant residues per hectare (Tolón and Lastra, 2010).

The pepper plant (PP) and eggplant (EP) residues were left to dry and then crushed to facilitate their homogenization and subsequent handling. The characterization of the raw materials corresponding to PP and EP is shown in Table 1 .


2.3 Experimental set up


2.3.1 Hydrothermal pretreatment

Hydrothermal pretreatment was carried out in closed bottles to avoid loss of water and volatile compounds by evaporation. Each bottle was fed with 15 g of PP or EP substrate and the samples were heat treated in an autoclave (Selecta P. Autester Mod. 437-G) working at 120 °C and 2 atm (Gil et al., 2019). The autoclave was equipped with a time programming system to control the pretreatment time. The pretreatment times were fixed at 0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 60 and 70 min for both feedstocks.


2.3.2 Respirometry test

A respirometry test was performed to evaluate the aerobic biodegradability of both plants with and without pretreatment.

The respirometer consisted of a thermostated bath and two 1-L Erlenmeyer flasks. The content of the flasks was magnetically stirred at 300 rpm and two oximeters monitored the oxygen content, which was maintained between 6.8 and 7.0 mg/L through the injection of compressed air. Oxygen concentration was measured and registered continuously by a data acquisition system (Chica et al., 2003) (Patent No. ES2283171 A1 of 16 October 2007) developed by the RNM-271 Engineering Chemical research group (2007).

The experiment was performed in duplicate, where microbiological activity is expressed as specific oxygen uptake rate (SOUR, kg O_2/kg TVS·s) and cumulative oxygen demand for twenty hours (OD_20, kg O_2/kg TVS).


2.3.3 Anaerobic digesters

The experimental set-up used for AD consisted of four 1-L Pyrex complete mixing digesters working under mesophilic conditions. The digesters were equipped with four connections to load feedstock, ventilate the biogas, inject inert gas (nitrogen) to maintain the anaerobic conditions and remove effluent. The content of the digesters was magnetically stirred and temperature was maintained by means of a thermostatic jacket containing water at 37 °C. The volume of methane produced during the process was measured using 1-L Boyle-Mariotte reservoirs connected to each reactor. To remove the CO_2 produced during the process, tightly closed bubblers containing a NaOH solution (6 N) were connected between the two elements. The methane volume displaced an equal measurable volume of water from the reservoir, which was measured with a test tube. This volume was corrected in order to prevent the effect of water steam pressure and the measured methane was then expressed at standard temperature and pressure conditions (STP: 0 °C and 1 atm).


2.3.3.1 Experimental procedure

The anaerobic reactors were loaded at a ratio substrate:inoculum ratio of 1:7 (g VS). In order to activate the biomass prior to the experiments, the digesters were first fed with a synthetic solution composed of glucose, sodium acetate and lactic acid (GAL solution) at concentrations of 50 g/L, 25 g/L and 21 mL/L, respectively. During this initial period, the organic load added to the digesters was gradually increased from 0.50 to 1.00 g VS/L over a 15-day period. During this inoculation period, the volume of methane was measured as a function of time.

Once this preliminary inoculation step was completed, a series of mesophilic experiments were carried out using the PP and EP. The load added to the digesters was increased from 0.25 g VS/L to 1.00 g VS/L, with intervals of 0.25 g VS/L in each assay to allow the biomass adaptation to the substrates.

In a previous stage, the digesters were fed with untreated PP and EP to obtain the methane production yield of the substrates without pretreatment. Each load was carried out at least in triplicate for each of the four digesters with the pretreated substrate: two digesters were initially feed PP (RA) and another two were fed EP (RB). As shown in Table 2 , the digesters were then fed a mixture of PP and EP in varying percentages. The results were expressed as mean value ± standard deviation. Loads of 1.00 g VS/L were added to the digesters throughout the experimental process.

During the experiment, the volume of methane was measured as a function of time and the samples were taken and analyzed before and after feeding. All the experiments, including start-up, biomass adaptation and waste treatment, were carried out over a 60-day period.

The anaerobic inoculum used in the experiment was obtained from La Golondrina Waste Water Treatment Plant (EMACSA), which is located in Cordoba, Spain.

The characteristics of the inoculum were pH: 7.72 ± 0.01, TS and VS: 23,575 ± 255 mg/kg and 10,277 ± 382 mg/kg, respectively. The methanogenic activity of the inoculum was 59 mL_STP/g VS·h, which was calculated from the slope of the linear part of the graphical representation of methane volume vs. time, obtained in laboratory reactors (Hussain and Dubey, 2017; Zulquer and Jawed, 2010).


2.4 Software

Sigma-Plot software (version 11.0) was used to create the graphs, perform the statistical analysis (mean values and standard deviation) and fit the experimental data presented in this work.


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Evaluation of hydrothermal pretreatment

To evaluate the hydrothermal pretreatment, the solubilization of carbon and nitrogen during the experiment time was considered. Fig. 1 shows the variation in the TOC concentration with pretreatment time. As can be seen, TOC increased with time up to 40 min. After this time, no increases in TOC content were observed for either substrate, and the PP values remained above the corresponding EP values. As shown in the figure, the increase in the concentration of TOC in the PP after pretreatment led to an increase of 108 g TOC/kg with respect to the untreated substrate (a 100% increase). EP showed an increase of 82 g C/kg (68%), which was lower than the previous one. These values correspond to a pretreatment time of 40 min, since the solubilization of organic matter did not improve at higher times. Other authors have evaluated the solubilization of organic matter in algae through CODs and obtained the highest percentage of solubilization for hydrothermal pretreatment at 120 °C for 30 min (Cho et al., 2013), although it depends on the characteristics of each substrate.

Fig. 2 shows the solubilization behavior of the soluble total nitrogen (STN), which is similar for both substrates. The solubilized nitrogen increased linearly with respect to the pretreatment time (PP r^2 = 0.9670 and EP r^2 = 0.9395). As can be seen in the figure, EP has a higher STN content than PP for the different pretreatment times. However, PP shows a larger increase in STN content than EP. Specifically, the STN increased by 56% and 27% with respect to the values for PP and EP without pretreatment, respectively. Both values are higher than the 22% obtained by Tampio et al. (2014) for pretreated food waste at 160 °C. Given that AD can be carried out after the pretreatment, a high soluble nitrogen content is not recommended as it can inhibit the process (Chen et al., 2008). At adequate concentrations, however, soluble nitrogen is an essential nutrient for the proper development of the process.

Fig. 3 shows the linear relationship between the TOC and STN content in both substrates at the different pretreatment times. As can be seen, the relationship is better for EP. Moreover, almost all the data for both PP and EP are within a 99% confidence interval. Consequently, the increase in the carbon in the liquid fraction is proportional to the solubilization of the nitrogen, thus indicating that the hydrothermal pretreatment affects the entire substrate (Serrano et al., 2016).

It is important to note that temperatures above 160 °C promote the solubilization of the lignocellulosic biomass, but phenolic compounds also occur, which may have inhibitory and/or toxic effects for the microbiological population (Pellera and Gidarakos, 2017; Hendriks and Zeeman, 2009; Gossett et al., 1982). However, given that the operating temperature was lower than 160 °C, no undesirable compounds should be formed. Furthermore, a pH of between 4 and 7 prevents the degradation of sugars and the formation of inhibitors (Kumari and Singh, 2018). In this case, the pH after pretreatment ranged from 6.63 to 6.00 and from 7.00 to 6.02 pH units for EP and PP, respectively, corresponding to the raw material and the maximum pretreatment time.

Consequently, hydrothermal pretreatment is an efficient method for accelerating solubilization due to its effect on both the physicochemical properties and structural characteristics of PP and EP under the study conditions. It is important to note that the results of the pretreatment will depend on the substrate type, the pretreatment type and the operating conditions. Moreover, due to the complexity of lignocellulosic structures, the same pretreatment applied to different substrates will yield different results (Pellera and Gidarakos, 2018).


3.2 Evaluation of structural changes

Following the application of the hydrothermal pretreatment, the possible structural changes in the substrates were evaluated at 40 min time. As can be seen in the FTIR spectra (Fig. 4 ), there were no changes in the functional groups present in the EP and PP substrates after the pretreatment. This indicates that the soluble matter has the same chemical structure as the initial substrate.

The large band at 1042 cm^−1 is due to CO, CC stretching or COH bending in hemicelluloses (Xiao et al., 2001). The peaks corresponding to 1045 and 1270 cm^−1 are usually related to the lignin content (Kaparaju and Felby, 2010). Kaparaju and Felby (2010) applied hydrothermal pretreatment at temperatures above 165 °C to wheat straw and corn stover and found variations in the profiles.


3.3 Biodegradability test

The oxygen consumption rate in the microbial degradation of the organic matter in the sample (dissolved or suspended) can be evaluated by aerobic biodegradability provided that solubilization and/or hydrolysis occurs within 20 h under the experimental conditions. The determination of oxygen consumption is useful for evaluating the substrate biodegradability. Fig. 5 shows the results of the biodegradability test for EP and PP when applying a hydrothermal pretreatment time of 40 min and without pretreatment. As shown in the figure, the oxygen consumption rate increases until reaching a maximum value (SOURmax) and then decreases due to a reduction in the biodegradable organic matter available in the mixing liquor. As can be seen, the maximum SOUR value differs for each sample. The maximum SOUR values for each sample are shown in Table 3 .

The SOURmax value for both substrates corresponds to the samples without pretreatment, thus indicating higher microbiological activity. In addition, the OD_20 value is a variable proportional to the biodegradability of the evaluated sample (Gil et al., 2019; Gil et al., 2018). These values are also shown in Table 3, where it is shown that the highest OD_20 corresponds to both substrates without pretreatment. This behavior may be due to the fact that the pretreatment sanitizes the substrate by inhibiting its microbial population and the biodegradability test therefore indicates lower values in these cases. It should be noted that in this type of test, inoculation with microorganisms is not carried out as in the case of biological oxygen demand (BOD). The BOD test indicates that both substrates are biodegradable under aerobic conditions and are therefore susceptible to anaerobic conditions. Several authors have observed a correlation between aerobic and anaerobic biodegradability in wastes of different kinds, as well as lignocellulosic and other substrates from meat industry waste (Liu et al., 2015, Buendía et al., 2008).


3.4 Evaluation of anaerobic digestion


3.4.1 Monitoring parameters and stability

Following the evaluation of the hydrothermal pretreatment conditions, the AD of PP and EP with a 40-minute hydrothermal pretreatment was evaluated.

The stability of the anaerobic process is a crucial factor in achieving the appropriate energy recovery of the pretreated substrate given that process destabilization can easily occur. AD stability was evaluated according to the evolution of the pH, alkalinity and volatile acidity during the AD of the pretreated PP and EP.

The pH was approximately constant throughout the experiments, with an average value of 8.15 ± 0.06. This value was slightly higher than the value recommended in the literature for AD (Wheatley, 1990; Fannin, 1987), which might be a consequence of pH value observed in the WWTP inoculum. Nevertheless, the process was found to be stable even at those pH values. Fig. 6 A shows the alkalinity values reached for each percentage of the substrates in the mixture. The lowest alkalinity values coincide with the loads of the individual substrates, and reach a maximum value for the mixture with 50% of each substrate. The observed trend coincides with the evolution of VA. Although the alkalinity values are high, they are compensated by the VA content as the VA/Alk ratio was less than 0.1 throughout the experimental process, which is indicative of a stable process (Balaguer et al., 1992).

As can be observed in Fig. 6B, Alk and VA have a linear relationship (r^2 of 0.8157). The values obtained during the AD process are within ±10%, which is consistent with the VA/Alk ratio indicated above.

In addition, it is important to monitor the free ammonia concentration as it is one of the main inhibitors of AD (Borowski et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2008). As regards the evolution of the soluble nitrogen content in the mixing liquor of the digesters during co-digestion, 78% of the TSN content is in ammoniacal form (Fig. 7 ). The nitrogen content is in the range 377 ± 35 to 711 ± 69 mg N/L and does not exceed the values indicated in the literature as inhibitory (Chen et al., 2008).

On the other hand, ammoniacal nitrogen content, temperature and pH are factors that determine the formation of free ammonia. This form of nitrogen is considered to be responsible for ammonia inhibition (Angelidaki and Ahring, 1993). Fig. 8 shows the free ammonia content during the anaerobic co-digestion process, which was calculated according to the process described in the literature (Siles et al., 2010; Østergaard, 1985). The free ammonia values remained constant from 54 ± 15 to 104 ± 42 mg N/L, with the lowest values observed for loads of 50% of each substrate in the mixture and the highest values at 100% of each substrate, which coincides with the behavior of ammoniacal nitrogen. Therefore, the observed values were not high and did not exceed the values indicated in the literature as inhibitors of the process (Rajagopal et al., 2013; Siles et al., 2010; Chen et al., 2008; Angelidaki and Ahring, 1993). Given that the lowest values were obtained for the loads corresponding to 50% of each substrate (PP:EP, 50:50), this percentage of residue in the mixture could be suitable for combined treatment under the experimental conditions.


3.4.2 Methane yield coefficient and solubilization of organic matter

In order to evaluate methane production during the process, the production yield of the PP and EP substrates without pretreatment was taken as a reference. Fig. 9 A shows the reference values for the untreated substrates (24 and 15 mL_STP/g VS for EP and PP, respectively), which were always lower than the values for the pretreated substrates. The methane yield was 2.4 times higher for the pretreated EP and 4.7 times higher for the pretreated PP. These results are higher than those obtained by Pecorini et al. (2016) in their study on urban organic waste with different lignocellulosic content at 134 °C. Other studies have reported that temperatures above 100 °C decrease methane production due to the alteration of the chemical composition of the substrate (Fernández-Cegrí et al., 2012). Pellera and Gidarakos (2017) observed an improvement in methane production in only one pretreated substrate (orange peel, 150 °C) with respect to the untreated substrate. Chandra et al (2012) obtained 222% more methane from rice straw treated at 200 °C for 10 min compared to untreated rice straw, and Cho et al (2013) obtained 1.2 times more methane after hydrothermal pretreatment (120 °C, 30 min) of algae.

As can be seen in Table 2, the methane production yield also varies depending on the percentage of the pretreated substrates in the mixture to be co-digested (Table 2). An optimum yield is obtained when the mixture contains 50% of each pretreated substrate, which corresponds to a value of 84.5 ± 7.6 mL_STP CH_4/g VS. Therefore, co-digestion of the pretreated substrates increases the methane yield with respect to the individual substrates with and without pretreatment. The results obtained for the production yield are consistent with those obtained for TOC in the mixing liquor. As can be seen in Fig. 8, lower TOC values coincide with higher methane production values due mainly to the transformation of solubilized and biodegradable organic matter into biogas. Fig. 9B shows the TOC content of the substrates with and without pretreatment in relation to the methane production of each. As can be seen, there is a linear correlation (r^2 = 0.9928) between the TOC content of each substrate and higher methane production. This linearity is similar to that obtained by Pecorini et al. (2016) for the production of methane and CODs in the treatment of lignocellulosic substrates. Moreover, as can be observed in the figure, the production of CH_4 increased by 144% and 393% in the treated EP and PP, respectively. As regards TOC, the increase was 68% and 151% for the treated EP and PP, respectively.


4 Conclusions

This study evaluated the influence of hydrothermal pretreatment at 120 °C and different times on the solubilization and the degradability of two solid agricultural wastes, pepper plant and eggplant. The evaluation showed that the most adequate pretreatment time was 40 min for both substrates (EP and PP). However, the biodegradability test showed lower aerobic biodegradability of pretreated substrates, which might be a consequence of microbial inhibition derived from the sanitation caused by the hydrothermal pretreatment.

Moreover, the combination of a hydrothermal pretreatment and co-digestion of pepper plant with eggplant showed a positive synergy for methane production and stability. A maximum value of 84.5 ± 7.6 mL CH_4 STP/g VS was reached for a 50:50 mixture of PP and EP, which entailed an improvement in the results obtained for each of the substrates individually. The application of a pretreatment and the co-digestion of these substrates is of interest provided that these treatments are energetically viable, in which case an evaluation of the entire process would be required.