TITLE: Effect of hydrothermal pretreatment on Miscanthus anaerobic digestion


1 Introduction

Fossil fuels, such as coal, oil and natural gas, have been applied as the main energy source for hundreds of years, but they have been considered as unsustainable in recent years since they are non-renewable and produces carbon dioxide. Many countries are trying to transform their energy structures from fossil fuel-based energy structures to renewable energy-based structures. In these circumstances bioenergy has attracted considerable attention.

Lignocellulosic material, mainly composed of cellulose and hemicellulose, is a promising source of energy for biofuel production since it does not release extra carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. Lignocellulosic waste (such as waste straws and garden waste) and energy crops are the two most studied substrates for bioenergy production. Compared with waste straws, energy crops have higher energy potential and heat value, which lead to a more profitable transformation process. Miscanthus, as a widely available plant in Asia, has been regarded as an ideal energy crop for several reasons: (1) it is a C_4photosynthesis grass with high dry matter production; (2) it has low lignin and ash content which suggest a better biodegradability; (3)its low sulfur content leads to low production of SO_x; (4) it has high heat resistance, cold resistance, drought endurance, heavy metals tolerance and capacity to grow in saline soils; (5) it is high yielding crop with very low nutrient requirements which has a low management cost. In fact, the yield of Miscanthus was much higher than other energy crops. (Brosse et al., 2012; Christian et al., 2008; Chung and Kim, 2012; Farage et al., 2006; Himken et al., 1997; Nges et al., 2016; Souza et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2008). Miscanthus has been studied as an energy crop in Europe since the 1980s and also has attracted more and more attention in East Asia (Chung and Kim, 2012).

As a kind of lignocellulosic material, the biodegradability of Miscanthus is limited by the biomass recalcitrance. Except cellulose, lignin and hemicellulose are the two main components contained in Miscanthus. However the existence of lignin and hemicellulose creates barriers to protect cellulose from being degraded by microorganisms. Lignin cannot be used during anaerobic digestion and the existence of lignin not only provides a physical barrier but also inactivate cellulase by irreversible absorption (Kim et al., 2015; Yuan et al., 2013). Unlike lignin, hemicellulose is degradable during the anaerobic digestion, but its degradability is much lower than cellulose (Brosse et al., 2012). The removal of either lignin or hemicellulose can increase the cellulose digestibility (Gu et al., 2015; Hsu et al., 2010). Therefore, suitable pretreatment is required before the anaerobic digestion to release cellulose from the protection of the lignin and hemicellulose. In previous studies, many pretreatments, such as physical, alkali, acid and fungal pretreatment, have been applied in lignocellulosic material anaerobic digestion (Sun et al., 2016). Hydrothermal pretreatment is an effective physio-chemical method for lignocellulosic material pretreatment to structurally destroy lignocellulose material. Since hemicellulose degrades more easily than cellulose under hydrothermal condition, some of the hemicellulose and lignin can be removed before the anaerobic hydrolysis step. The hydrothermal temperature is the most important factor influencing the pretreatment effect and it is always controlled under 240 °C since the cellulose degrades when the temperature goes higher (Kumar et al., 2015; Sun et al., 2016).

In conclusion, Miscanthus has been regard as a potential energy grass for biogas production after pretreatment and anaerobic digestion (Cha et al., 2016; Chung and Kim, 2012; Clifton-Brown et al., 2015). In this paper, hydrothermal pretreatment has been applied to improve the biodegradability of Miscanthus. The effect of different pretreatment temperature on biogas production and enzymatic hydrolysis has been compared. Moreover, structural change has been analyzed to deep understanding the mechanisms of hydrothermal pretreatment.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Feedstock

Miscanthus (Miscanthus sacchariflorus) was harvested and packaged in Jiangsu province, China. The collected Miscanthus was air dried at room temperature and broken with a paper cutter. Then the Miscanthus was screened and particles which passed through a 20-mesh sieve and retained by a 40-mesh sieve were collected and stored in a plastic vacuum bag to prevent possible degradation.


2.2 Hydrothermal pretreatment

The hydrothermal pretreatment of Miscanthus was performed in a 100 mL stainless steel reactor with an inserted Teflon vessel. In every reactor, a 2.5 g sample of Miscanthus was added followed by 25 mL of distilled water. The reactors were fully tightened and placed in a high temperature rotation chamber at 20 rpm in order to provide continuous mixture. The pretreatment temperature was set at 125, 150, 175 and 200 °C, respectively, and all reactors were cooled down to room temperature using cold water after the 30 min pretreatment period. After pretreatment, the slurry was filtered for solid-liquid separation and recovered Miscanthus was washed using distilled water. Finally, the pretreated Miscanthus was dried and stored in a vacuum plastic bag for subsequent analysis.


2.3 Anaerobic digestion

The anaerobic digestion of hydrothermal pretreated Miscanthus was performed in batch reactors with digested pig manure obtained from a livestock and poultry farm as the inoculum. The characteristics of Miscanthus and inoculum are displayed in Table 1 . 100 mL serum bottles with 40 mL working volume were used in this test. 0.8 g of Miscanthus (based on TS) and 40 mL of pig manure was mixed and added into the serum bottle, and extra water was also added to adjust the total TS content to 5% (w/v). Then the bottles were sealed with rubber stoppers and aluminum caps to maintain anaerobic conditions. All the reactors were placed in a thermostatic chamber at 35 °C for digestion. The blank group with the same amount of inoculums and working volume was also set to exclude the biogas produced by the inoculum.


2.4 Enzymatic hydrolysis

The commercial cellulase concentrated solution used in this experiment was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Sodium acetate buffer (50 mM, pH 5.0) was used to dilute the solution. 10 mL glass tubes with 8 mL working volume were used as reactors for enzyme hydrolysis. When performing the hydrolysis, 80 mg pretreated Miscanthus was added into the glass tube, followed with cellulase solution and sodium acetate buffer, which maintain the TS content at 1% (w/v). The mixed substrate was incubated in a 50 °C incubator shaker at190 rpm for 3–72 h. When the hydrolysis was finished, the bottles were incubated in a water bath at 100 °C for 10 min to deactivate the enzyme. Then hydrolyzed samples were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15 min for solid-liquid separation. The supernatants were collected to test the cellulose hydrolysis rate.


2.5 Analytical methods

The total solids (TS) and volatile solids (VS) content of Miscanthus and digested pig manure were tested using standard methods (APHA, 2012). The cellulase activity was analyzed using the DNS method. The cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin content in different Miscanthus samples were measured according to the NREL LAP protocol (Sluiter et al., 2008).

The cellulose hydrolysis rate during enzyme pretreatment was determined by calculating the glucose and cellobiose concentration in the hydrolysis liquid phase. The glucose and cellobiose concentration were analyzed by an Angelent 1200 high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system with refractive index detector and NH2P-50 4E column (Shodex). The column and detector temperature were both set to 30 °C, respectively. Degassed HPLC grade water was used as the mobile phase at a flow rate of 0.8 mL/min.

The change of functional groups before and after hydrothermal pretreatment was analyzed by a Fourier transform infrared spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Nicolet 5700). The spectra were formed after 32 times scanning from 4000 to 400 cm^−1 and OMNIC software was used for analysis.

An X-ray diffractometer (Bruker, D8 Advance) with Cu Kα radiation at a wavelength of 0.1542 nm (50 kV, 300 mA) was use for the X-ray diffraction test. The Miscanthus was scanned at angles varying from 10° to 50° with an scanning speed of 2°/min, and the cellulose crystallinity was calculated (Segal et al., 1959).

The surface structure change of Miscanthus after hydrothermal pretreatment was analyzed using a scanning electron microscope (Phenom, Pro). The samples were coated with gold and then examined under 10 kV accelerating voltage.


2.6 Statistical methods

Each data point was the average of three measurements and the significance test was performed with SAS 8.0.


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Compositional change after hydrothermal pretreatment

The chemical composition of raw Miscanthus and hydrothermal pretreated Miscanthus is shown in Fig. 1 . The lignocellulose content (including cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin) of Miscanthus used in this study was 89.6%, which was close to other Miscanthus species reported in previous works (Brosse et al., 2012). The cellulose and hemicellulose content of raw Miscanthus was 38.2 and 31.0% respectively. Compared with other commonly used lignocellulosic materials such as rice straw, corn stover and wheat straw (Chen et al., 2014b; Krishania et al., 2013; Shi et al., 2013), the cellulose and hemicellulose content, which represents the total fermentable sugar, was much higher in Miscanthus. After hydrothermal pretreatment, although the total amount of holocellulose (cellulose and hemicellulose) did not change a lot, the ratio of cellulose and hemicellulose was different. The increasing in cellulose content was always companied by a decrease in hemicellulose. In the 125 °C and 150 °C pretreated samples, the hemicellulose slightly decreased a little, as a result the cellulose increased slightly to 40.6 and 40.8%. In the 175 °C and 200 °C pretreated samples, the degradation of hemicellulose was much more severe. This phenomenon led to a high cellulose concentration and the cellulose content in both samples reached 49.0%. The lignin content also changed. There was no obvious different in the lignin content of the 125 °C, 150 °C and 175 °C pretreated samples which was about 0.8% higher than the raw material, but it was much higher in the 200 °C pretreated Miscanthus. The increase of lignin also contributes to the degradation of hemicellulose. The ash in Miscanthus was low, with only 3.1% in raw material and it decreased as the pretreatment temperature increased. According to the results, the hemicellulose removal depended on the hydrothermal temperature. Only when the temperature was higher than 175 °C was the pretreatment efficient. Other studies also have found the same results (Prunescu et al., 2015; Santucci et al., 2015).

Although hemicellulose can also be fermented, using anaerobic microorganisms, its digestibility was lower than cellulose and needed more time for digestion. Moreover, the existence of hemicellulose will prevent cellulase from accessing cellulose (Yang et al., 2015). The degradation of hemicellulose in the 175 °C and 200 °C hydrothermal pretreated Miscanthus particles may lead to a higher biodegradability since the cellulose is more accessible.


3.2 Biogas and methane production

The biogas and methane production of raw and hydrothermal pretreated Miscanthus during the anaerobic digestion process is illustrated in Fig. 2 (a) and (b). It can be inferred that the biogas production quantity and speed of Miscanthus was affected by the hydrothermal temperature. The ANOVA showed that the biogas and methane production was significantly influenced by hydrothermal pretreatment (p < 0.05). Although the biogas production increased when the hydrothermal temperature increased from 125 to 175 °C, the cumulative biogas production curves between these samples were similar. When the hydrothermal temperature changed to 200 °C, the biogas production trends were totally different from other samples.

The biogas production process can be roughly divided into two stages. The first stage was from the start to 35 days into the process. In this stage, the cumulative biogas production in the raw material and in the 125, 150, 175 °C hydrothermal pretreated materials were straight lines, which represent a steady degradation of substrate. The main difference between pretreated and raw samples was the biogas quantity, but there was no obvious difference observed between the 125, 150 and 175 °C pretreated samples. The production of biogas in the 200 °C pretreated Miscanthus showed much more severe changes than other samples. It achieved a very high biogas production in the first day, but decreased to a low production rate in the third day and did not recover until day 12. The 200 °C sample started its second peak from about day 17 and maintained for almost 10 days. Then the biogas production rate decreased to low levels again. The first stage came to the end at day 35 and the biogas productions in all reactors were almost stopped. After about 5 days of adjustment, the second biogas production stage started. In this stage, although the biogas production in the raw material and the 125, 150, 175 °C hydrothermal pretreated materials was slower than during the first stage, the biogas production rate was lower. The biogas production of 200 °C hydrothermal pretreated Miscanthus still remained at a low level during this stage.

Fig. 2(b) shows the methane production and percentage methane production of different samples. Although methane production is decisively influenced by biogas production, the methane content also affected a lot. The percentage methane production can reflect the methane production rate. It is obvious that in the raw material and the 125, 150 and 175 °C hydrothermal pretreated materials the biogas production was steady since the percentage methane production did not change significantly over time. They achieved 12.9–23.8% methane production every 10 days in the first stage (from day 0 to day 40) and it decreased to less than 10% in the second stage. The fastest methane production observed in these four samples was between the 20th and 30th day. This indicated a steady but long term anaerobic digestion cycle. The percentage of methane production in the 200 °C pretreated Miscanthus was totally different. More than 80% of the methane was produced in the first 30 days which was 50% faster than other samples. The 200 °C hydrothermal pretreated Miscanthus achieved its fastest biogas production in the period from day 20 to day 30, in which 36.6% of total methane was produced. After 30 days digestion, its methane production dramatically decreased to less than 6% every 10 days. In all five samples, the highest methane production was obtained in the 175 °C pretreated samples. Although the biogas production in the 125, 150 and 200 °C pretreated samples was higher than in the raw material, the methane production of these four samples did not show obvious differences.

Hydrothermal pretreatment is an effective pretreatment method, increasing the biogas production rate of Miscanthus by 49.7% compared with the raw material in this study. Although the total methane production in this study is not comparable to other studies (using steam explosion, fungi pretreatment and etc) since the biogas production is also affected by the digestion condition such as inoculum activity, the difference between pretreated and raw material in this study (nearly 50%) is more significant than other studies, in which the difference varied from 4% to 27% (Chandra et al., 2012; Giuseppe et al., 2013; Schroyen et al., 2015). This is due to the cellulose composition increasing by 28.2% after pretreatment. The same conclusion can also be drawn from Hesami’s study which used hydrothermal methods to treat sunflower stalks and achieved almost an increase in biogas production of 88% since the cellulose composition increased by 55% (Hesami et al., 2015). Compared with the reported biogas production and methane of waste straws, the biogas production of Miscanthus was steadier and this may contribute to its high cellulose and hemicellulose content (Chen et al., 2014a,b).

In conclusion, the biogas and methane production of different samples indicates that: (1) although the effect of temperature at 125 and 150 °C was not obvious, hydrothermal pretreatment had evident effects on biogas and methane production yields and rate; (2) the biogas production was concentrated to the first 30 days by 200 °C hydrothermal pretreatment which means the digestion time decreased by 50%, this would be very beneficial for cost saving. (3) The increased biogas production quantity and speed in the 175 and 200 °C pretreated samples contributed to the hemicellulose removal.


3.3 Enzymatic hydrolysis

A cellulase hydrolysis test was used to compare the enzymatic digestibility of raw Miscanthus and different hydrothermal pretreated samples. Fig. 3 shows the glucose production in different samples after 72 h hydrolysis. The enzyme digestibility of raw material was low with 0.14 mg/mL glucose concentration after 72 h hydrolysis. Compared with the raw material, the hydrolysis rate in 125 and 150 °C hydrothermal pretreated samples only increased 21.4% and the final glucose concentration obtained was about 0.17 mg/mL. The glucose production observed in the 175 and 200 °C hydrothermal pretreated samples was much higher and they achieved 0.4 and 2.0 mg/mL glucose after the pretreatment. The cellulose hydrolysis rate also can be calculated according to the glucose production and it was 3.6, 4.1, 4.12, 8.1 and 36.7% in the raw material, 125 °C pretreated, 150 °C pretreated,175 °C pretreated, 200 °C pretreated Miscanthus, respectively. Compared with the hydrolysis of other materials, the Miscanthus hydrolysis was more stable. The hydrolysis speed of rice straw decreased a lot after 48 h hydrolysis (Gu et al., 2015), but the 200 °C pretreated Miscanthus still maintained a high hydrolysis rate after 72 h hydrolysis, which suggests a further hydrolysis if the time were longer.

The cellulase hydrolysis results of different samples can explain the difference observed in biogas production. It is generally recognized that hydrolysis is the key stage in limiting the rate of lignocellulose anaerobic digestion (Himmel et al., 2007). In this experiment, the 200 °C pretreated sample achieved the highest glucose concentration and cellulose hydrolysis rate, while the hydrolysis speeds of the raw material, and the 125 and 150 °C samples were not significantly different. This suggests that the cellulose in the 200 °C pretreated Miscanthus was more accessible than in other samples. This phenomenon can well explain why the 200 °C pretreated sample achieved much higher biogas production in the first 40 days. Moreover, it also can explain the similar biogas and methane production between the raw material, and the 125 and 150 °C pretreated materials.

Many factors affect the hydrolysis speed, including the lignin content, hemicellulose content, particle size, and surface area. In this experiment, all the particles were the same size and their surface areas were similar. The main reason for the high cellulase efficiency observed in the 200 °C pretreated Miscanthus was the removal of hemicellulose. The same results also can be observed in Sugarcane Bagasse hydrothermal pretreatment (Santucci et al., 2015).

The total biogas production is an important parameter for choosing the optimal pretreatment condition, but the hydrolysis speed also cannot be ignored. Although 175 °C hydrothermal pretreatment lead to the highest biogas production in the batch test, the 200 °C pretreated had much higher hydrolysis rate and biogas production speed which indicate larger potential in continuous system. In consideration of both biogas and glucose production, 200 °C should be the optimal pretreatment temperature.


3.4 Insight analysis of structure change


3.4.1 Change of chemical bonds

FTIR spectra in the region of 4000–400 cm^−1 were used to examine the changes in lignocellulose chemical bonds. As the 175 °C sample got the highest methane yield and the 200 °C sample got the highest glucose production, their FTIR spectra were compared with RM in Fig. S1.

The variation was virtually displayed in the region of 1750–850 cm^−1. The absorption bands at 1515 cm^−1 were attributed to aromatic CC stretching and 1373 cm^−1 was assigned to aliphatic C–H stretching in methyl and phenol OH, while the band at 1125 cm^−1 was associated with syringyl units. Those three peaks were characteristic bands of lignin (Wang et al., 2015) and did not significantly change under different hydrothermal temperatures, indicating no dramatic damage to the aromatic ring structure after the pretreatment. However, all the three bands declined in 200 °C sample, suggesting that the chemical bonds of lignin was partly destroyed by 200 °C hydrothermal pretreatment, albeit with increased lignin content in Fig. 1. The absorption at 1726 m^−1 belonged to ester-linked acetyl, feruloyl and p-coumaroyl groups between hemicellulose and lignin (Sun et al., 2015), its relative intensity decreased after 200 hydrothermal pretreatment, indicating the fracture of hemicellulose-lignin ester-linked acetyl bonds. The peak of the C–O–C ring skeletal vibration at 1051 cm^−1‘ was attributed to hemicellulose structure changes (Hsu et al., 2010) and its intensity decreased with increased temperature, which corresponded to decreased hemicellulose content presented in Fig. 1. The chemical structure of lignocellulose was partly destroyed by 200 °C hydrothermal pretreatment, and the protective effect of hemicellulose and lignin on cellulose weakened, which resulted in high degradability and biogas production rate of 200 °C sample.


3.4.2 Change of crystallinity

In lignocellulosic materials, there are amorphous and crystalline regions of cellulose fibers. The crystalline cellulose is more recalcitrant to enzyme attack than amorphous cellulose, so the cellulose crystallinity is a parameter to analysis the cellulose digestibility. X-ray diffraction is an effective way to analyze the crystallinity of cellulose. The sharpness of peak was similar among samples (Fig. S2), but the crystallinity in pretreated samples increased obviously with temperature. The crystallinity of the raw material was 44.3%, and increased to 43.8 for 125 °C sample, 47.2 for 150 °C sample, 46.4 for 175 °C sample and 49.7% 200 °C sample. The reasons are those: (1) the removal of amorphous region cellulose since the crystalline cellulose is more resistance to chemical and biological degradation (Zhao et al., 2012); (2) the decrease of hemicellulose which is also amorphous. Although it is well known that high cellulose crystallinity increases the recalcitrance of cellulose fiber during enzyme hydrolysis (Fan et al., 1981; Sinitsyn et al., 1991), but for lignocellulose, the results of this study have found negative correlation between crystallinity and biodegradability. The enzymatic digestibility of lignocellulosic material is affected by many factors, thus the crystallinity cannot explain the results alone and it may not be the key factor in this experiment.


3.4.3 Change of surface structure

During the hydrothermal pretreatment, the surface structure of Miscanthus also changed. A scanning electron microscope was used to analyze the surface structure change in different samples. The surface of raw Miscanthus is very smooth with a compact solid structure and the lignocellulose is coated by wax. This surface structure protects the cellulose from being degraded by chemicals or microorganisms and as a result the biogas production and hydrolysis rate of the raw material was very slow. The SEM clearly showed that the surface wax layer was destroyed more and more seriously with the temperature raised (Fig. S3). In the 175 °C hydrothermal pretreated samples, the wax was almost removed. Furthermore, the surface structure began deconstruction and cracks were clearly observed on the surface. Compared with 125, 150 and 175 °C hydrothermal pretreated sample, the 200 °C pretreated Miscanthus had a much more rough surface, not only had the wax layer been completely deconstructed but also the cellulose fiber was exposed. Due to the deconstruction of Miscanthus surface, hydrothermal pretreated material had more internal surface and this can lead to an increase in biodegradability, which was observed in the biogas production and enzyme hydrolysis processes. In other studies using hydrothermal to treat lignocellulosic materials, the same phenomenon also has been observed (Hesami et al., 2015; Yu et al., 2016).


4 Conclusions

This study used hydrothermal pretreatment to enhance the biodegradability of Miscanthus. The results show that the hydrothermal effect is not obvious when the temperature is below 150 °C. Although more biogas was produced under 175 °C, 200 °C is the optimal condition since it achieved a higher cellulose hydrolysis speed and led to quicker biogas production. Moreover, the surface structure of Miscanthus was completely changed under 200 °C and this suggested a better biodegradability. Although cellulose crystallinity was increased after pretreatment, the biodegradability was not affected by this parameter.


Appendix A Supplementary data

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2016.10.085.


Appendix A Supplementary data

