TITLE: Prerequisite – An electrohydrolysis pretreatment for anaerobic digestion of lignocellulose waste material


1 Introduction

An anaerobic digestion is a mature technology widely applied for bioenergy production from the sewage sludge, animal manure, agricultural residue, industrial sludge and energy crops in developing and developed countries (Li and Khanal, 2016). These substrate has high levels of biodegradable organics make it an ideal feedstock for anaerobic digestion. Due to the continuous production in the industrial level, there is a huge accumulation of waste especially in pulp and paper mill industry, the gargantuan quantity of sludge was produced. Handling and management of this produced sludge from effluent treatment plant of pulp and paper mill has account more than 60% of the total wastewater treatment plant operating cost (Monte et al., 2009; Xu and Lancaster, 2009). Jackson et al. (2000) reported the produced sludge contains 45–50% of organic fraction with high moisture content that can be treated efficiently by biological treatment than thermal treatment.

The lignocellulose material consists mainly of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin. Due to the inherent recalcitrant structure of lignocellulose material towards enzymatic deconstruction (Himmel et al., 2007) pretreatment is necessary to make the holocelluloses amenable to enzymatic hydrolysis and fermentation (Yang and Wyman, 2008; Sharma et al., 2015). In recent years there has been renewed interest in pretreatment of lignocellulose biomass and waste for anaerobic digestion. The several structural and compositional properties of lignocellulosic content render it resistant to biodegradation. Even though there has been an extensive research on the effect of pretreatment, the correlation between the degradability of lignocellulose material, the structural and compositional properties remains unclear and contradictory (Zheng et al., 2014). Different kinds of physical, chemical, and biological pretreatments have been proposed for the conversion of organic matter to valuable energy source as biogas (Elliott and Mahmood, 2007).

As hydrolysis is a rate-limiting step in anaerobic digestion of pulp and paper mill sludge (PPMS) (Elliott and Mahmood, 2012; Wood et al., 2009) and also in previous study by Veluchamy and Kalamdhad (2017) reported that pretreatment is necessary to fasten the hydrolysis stage because of the longer digestion time. To accelerate the hydrolysis step, a novel electrohydrolysis pretreatment was investigated. Based on literature known so for, an electrohydrolysis pretreatment has been studied first to improve the hydrolysis stage in anaerobic digestion of lignocellulose waste material. The principle of electrohydrolysis pretreatment relies on electrophoresis, ohmic heating and electroosmosis resulting in the disintegration of particles and microbial cell lysis (Zhen et al., 2014). The electrophoresis is the process in which shifting of ions relative to a static phase depending on its electrical charge and molecular size (Mahmoud et al., 2010). The process in which thermal energy is generated by passing electric current through organic materials is known as ohmic heating (Varghese et al., 2014). The motion of solid particles suspended in a liquid, under the influence of an electrical field is known as electro-osmosis (Mahmoud et al., 2010). Electrohydrolysis is the process of passing direct current (DC) through an ionic substance to solubilize the organic matter by breaking the bonds between polymers induced by application of current through electrodes. Electrodes when connected to DC one becomes positively charged electrode and another becomes negatively charged electrode. This initiates the movement of electrolyte towards electrodes i.e., positive ions move to cathode and negative ions move to anode.

To delineate the effect of electrohydrolysis pretreatment, an applied voltage (DC) and time study were performed to fasten the hydrolysis step in anaerobic digestion. Therefore, in the light of literature studies the objective of this study is to the investigate the effect of electrohydrolysis pretreatment conditions (applied voltage and time), also to elucidate the changes produced in the structure and composition of the PPMS before and after pretreatment, followed by the batch anaerobic digestion process for the biological conversion of PPMS into biogas.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Materials

PPMS was obtained from the Nagaon paper mill located at Jagiroad, Assam, India. PPMS collected from the filter house of effluent treatment plant was used as a substrate. Collected PPMS was stored in refrigerator at 4 °C before further use. Cow dung collected from farm present in the vicinity of Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, North Guwahati, India, was used as the inoculum for the batch study. Table 1 shows the initial chemical characterization of substrate and inoculum.


2.2 Experimental set up

Fig. 1 gives the schematic representation of electrohydrolysis pretreatment setup. It consist of cylindrical plastic feed tank (10 cm diameter and 30 cm height), DC power generator, graphite electrode, flash mixer, RPM regulator, multimeter, ammeter and tachometer. The feed tank was half filled with PPMS in the ratio of 1:3 (PPMS: distilled water) to get slurry form. As PPMS contain high total solid content, three part of water is added to PPMS in order to make slurry condition to avoid clogging and also to provide enough passage way for DC. With the help of graphite electrode DC is supplied to the sample kept in the plastic tank. Two graphite electrode as cathode and anode are half immersed into the sample, placed at a distance without touching flash mixture and wall of the plastic reaction tank (Fig. 1). With the help of insulated flash mixture which is rotating at 300 rpm, the sample kept in a plastic feed tank are in suspension. The rpm of the flash mixture is maintained by the rpm regulator and with the tachometer. Ammeter and multimeter are used to measure the current and applied voltage respectively.

For electrohydrolysis pretreatment study, 200 g of PPMS is added to 600 mL of distilled water and mix properly to get slurry form. Based on the preliminary and literature (Yuan et al., 2011; Zhen et al., 2014) pretreatment condition such as applied voltage and time were selected. The pretreatment study is split into two approach. The first approach based on applied voltage (V) study, the prepared samples are kept at different applied voltage at a particular time. After getting the suitable voltage, the second approach based on time study, the prepared samples were kept at varied time with the best voltage in the plastic tank. The samples kept outside without any treatment is used as the control.


2.3 Anaerobic biodegradability tests

Batch reactor was performed to test the rate and extent of anaerobic biodegradability of untreated (control) and electrohydrolysis pretreated PPMS. Anaerobic reactors (1 L) were loaded with the mixture of pretreated PPMS and cow dung (set 1), and the mixture of untreated and cow dung (set 2) at a fixed food to microorganisms ratio equals to 2 based on volatile solid (VS) content that was attained from the previous study (Veluchamy and Kalamdhad, 2017). After adding essential macro and micro nutrients, all the reactor were purged with nitrogen in order to make anaerobic condition. Then it was coupled to another aspirator bottle having 1.5 N sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution that absorbs the CO_2 and H_2S and displaces NaOH solution that represent methane (CH_4) production (Dhamodharan et al., 2015). All the reactor were maintained at room temperature varies from 30 to 38 °C. Manual mixing was done three to four time in a day. The experiment was conducted in triplicate for 35 d.


2.4 Analytical methods

The different parameter such as pH, soluble chemical oxygen demand (sCOD), total solids, moisture content, and volatile solids, were analysed using standard protocols according to APHA (2005). Volatile fatty acid was analysed by pH titration method adopted by the DiLallo and Albertson (1961). Lignin was analysed using National renewable energy laboratory (NREL) procedure (Ehrman, 1996; Templeton and Ehrman, 1995). Cellulose and hemicellulose were analysed according to the protocol adopted by Updegraff (1969) and Goering and Van (1975) respectively. To determine the significant in dissimilarities between unpretreated and pretreated, analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used in the Origin Pro 9.0. Pretreatment experiments were conducted twice and their samples were analysed in triplicate.


2.5 Instrumental characterization

To study the structural changes happen on the PPMS before and after pretreatment, the instrumental analysis was carried out to identify the alteration happen on PPMS material surface. The surface alteration has been identified by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM (Zeiss, Sigma)). Double coated gold samples were used for the imaging, to put off degradation and for charge build up. The changes in lignocellulosic fraction has been extensively studied by using Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR). The FT-IR spectrum (PerkinElmer Spectrum 2) was recorded from 4000 to 400 cm^−1 at 16 scan with a resolution of 4 cm^−1. 1 mg of dried PPMS was mixed with 300 mg of KBr in a mortar, then the mixture was compressed for 3 min at 10 MPa to set up the sample disc. Moreover, the cellulose crystallinity has been characterized by X-ray diffractograms (XRD) with the Bruker, D-8 advance from 5 °C to 35 °C of diffracting angle (2θ) at the scanning speed of 5^o/min. The crystallinity index was measured from the XRD pattern by an empirical method (Nelson and O'Connor, 1964) using the following equation. FORMULA: I C = I cr - I am I cr Where I_C is the crystallinity index, I_cr is the maximum diffraction intensity at peak position at 2θ = 31° and I_am is the intensity at 2θ = 18°.


3 Result and discussion


3.1 Pretreatment effect on chemical characteristics


3.1.1 Effect of sCOD and VFA with applied voltage

The effect of applied voltage with constant time on PPMS treated by DC current in electrohydrolysis pretreatment was shown in Fig 2 (a). It was observed from the Fig 2(a) that the increase in applied voltage has shown increase in solubilization rate which was measured in the form of sCOD and VFA. The sCOD and VFA increased up to 15 V and then it got reduced. Further increasing the applied voltage shows decrease in sCOD and VFA. At higher applied voltage, there is a release of higher quantity of electron by the DC current but there was not sufficient protons from the substrate. During the reaction time there is a higher rate of vaporization of volatile compound produced from the pretreatment effect than the solubilization rate (Zhen et al., 2014). This may be the reason for reduction in sCOD and VFA at higher voltage. The increase in sCOD and VFA at 15 V was due to the release of sufficient electron by the DC current that was enough to neutralize the protons released from the PPMS. Thus, 15 V is found to be best for the time study.


3.1.2 Effect of sCOD and VFA with time

Hence for the time study, the samples were kept at 15 V for the different time duration. It was observed from the Fig 2(b) that the increase in exposure time has shown increase in solubilization rate which was measured in the form of sCOD and VFA. From the time study Fig. 2(b), the sample kept at the 45 min showed the highest sCOD with the increment of 1.91 times and VFA of about 1.85 times increment in electrohydrolysis pretreatment than control sample of PPMS. Zhen et al. (2014) obtained an increase of 1.5 times sCOD in waste activated sludge for the sample pretreated at 20 V for 40 min. Thus, 15 V for 45 min is found to be best pretreatment conditions for the electrohydrolysis pretreatment of PPMS.


3.1.3 Effect of current and time for applied voltage and time

It was observed that at the same applied voltage, the current is gradually increasing with the time of exposure (Tables 2 and 3 ). This is because of increase in conductivity caused by solubilization of particulate organic matter by the breaking of bonds between polymers induced by application of DC current. It was found that increase in applied voltage, then the slope of the current versus time also increased. When the sample pretreated at 10 V, there was no change in current whereas at 15 V showed an increase of current 0.005 amp. This is because of at higher voltages, there is more energy available to cause rapid solubilization of organic matter.

By analyzing the resistance versus time, it was observed that at the same applied voltage, the resistance is gradually decreasing as the time of exposure increases (Tables 2 and 3). This is because of hydrolysis of polymer into simple soluble monomers. As the time of exposure increased, more and more particulate matter is getting solubilized. The sample pretreated at 15 V for 15 min shows 2.6% reduction of resistance whereas at 45 min shows a 12.5% reduction of resistance. This huge difference in reduction of resistance at 15 V for longer exposure time, there is more energy available to break the bonds between polymers. Very few literature is available, Zhen et al. (2014) investigated the effect of combined electrical-alkali pretreatment to enhance the hydrolysis of waste activated sludge for anaerobic digestion process but does not revealed the effect of current or resistance with time.


3.2 Pretreatment effect on composition and characterization of PPMS


3.2.1 Compositional analysis

The compositional analysis was performed to identify the changes in composition of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin, at the before and after the electrohydrolysis pretreatment of PPMS. Table 4 shows the pretreatment conditions and lignocellulose contents of untreated and pretreated PPMS. From Table 4, it was observed that the increase in acid soluble lignin, insoluble lignin, and cellulose and reduction in the hemicellulose content. The increment in acid soluble and cellulose portrays that the electrohydrolysis pretreatment has the higher liquefaction and delignification characteristic. Similar results also obtained in the previous literature in thermal pretreatment (Li et al., 2007). Suggesting that the presence of higher acid soluble lignin could be easily fermentable by the fermentative microorganisms (Patel et al., 2015) and also the cellulose present in the pretreated PPMS has been easily accessed by the microbes when compared to the untreated PPMS. The reduction in the hemicellulose content may leads to the formation fermentation inhibitor such as furfural from xylose, hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) from glucose, and acetic acid from acetate groups attached to the hemicellulose (Gaur et al., 2016; Sharma et al., 2015). During electrohydrolysis pretreatment, hemicellulose is breakdown mainly into xylose and small amount of glucose. Thus, higher liquefaction and delignification of lignocellulose matter by the electrohydrolysis pretreatment could cut down or speedup the hydrolysis step, with the enhanced biogas production in anaerobic digestion. The experimental data of the lignocellulose content has quite a similar value for control and electrohydrolysis pretreatment. On analyzing the results by ANOVA, lignocellulose content varied significantly between the control and electrohydrolysis pretreatment (P = 0.0023).


3.2.2 FESEM

The physical structure of the untreated (control) and electrohydrolysis pretreated PPMS was studied by FESEM. FESEM images of control and electrohydrolysis pretreated PPMS (Supplementary information S1) showed a greater changes in morphological changes. The control sample has rigid compacted smooth surface with some batches, whereas in electrohydrolysis pretreated sample shows its morphological changes with fissures and large hollows on their surface layer. Due to the alteration in their morphological, there was a release of easily biodegradable substance that enhance the bioaccessibility of cellulose in the electrohydrolysis pretreatment. Similar finding has been identified for the lignocellulose material using different heating devise (Gabhane et al., 2011; Zhen et al., 2014).


3.2.3 FTIR

With the help of characteristic absorbance band at FTIR spectrum, the structural and components change in cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin can be extensively studied and evaluated. Morán et al. (2008) had been well documented the characteristic FTIR bands of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin. The characteristic band changes in relative absorbance were applied to determine the structural and components change after pretreatment. FTIR spectra of electrohydrolysis pretreated and untreated PPMS (Supplementary information S2) has shown variation in the characteristic band in relative absorbance of lignocellulose content. The efficiency of electrohydrolysis pretreatment effect on structural changes has been studied by comparing with Morán et al. (2008) (as denoted by wavenumber reported) and the present pretreatment study (as denoted by wavenumber picked) with the corresponding assignment are enlisted in Table 5 . After pretreatment the relative absorbance band of the lignin characteristic bands are slightly decreased, whereas the relative absorbance band of the cellulose are slightly increased, indicating a changes in the relative structural and components of lignocellulose content. To the best literature till now, there was no study used the FTIR analysis for the structural changes at pretreatment stage, whereas the study related to reduction in organic content and aliphatic chain during anaerobic digestion (Marcato et al., 2009; Yang et al., 2009) has been studied.


3.2.4 XRD

By studying the changes in cellulose crystallinity, the effectiveness of electrohydrolysis pretreatment on PPMS was evaluated. The XRD spectra of control and electrohydrolysis pretreated PPMS (Supplementary information S3) has shown great variation in their peaks reduction. The sharp peaks in control sample indicates the higher crystalline in nature whereas in pretreated PPMS possess less peaks that indicates the amorphous nature. Reduced peaks (Fig. S3) after pretreatment depicts the reduction in their cellulose crystallinity. After pretreatment, there was a severe reduction in cellulose crystallinity. It was observed mathematically that the cellulose crystallinity reduced from 0.9137 in control to 0.7833 electrohydrolysis pretreated PPMS. Yang et al. (2009) depicted that any reduction in crystallinity of cellulose would contribute to an increased fragility and susceptibility of cell wall for the cellulolytic microorganisms. These results are in accordance with previous pretreatment studies for ethanol production (Gabhane et al., 2011; Yang and Wyman, 2008).


3.3 Pretreatment effect on biogas production

Electrohydrolysis pretreatment of PPMS at 15 V for 45 min showed the higher rate of solubilization. So, batch anaerobic study was conducted for pretreated and unpretreated PPMS to evaluate the rate and efficacy of electrohydrolysis pretreatment for enhanced CH_4 production. The steep curve of cumulative CH_4 production of electrohydrolysis pretreated PPMS provides the evident for superior degradation than the untreated PPMS (Fig. 3 ). The cumulative CH_4 production on the 35^th day of electrohydrolysis pretreated PPMS was 2618 ± 10 mL of CH_4 whereas for untreated PPMS was 2068 ± 12 mL of CH_4. The pretreatment at 15 V for 45 min alter the lignocellulose structure in PPMS leading to production of fermentable sugars that can be quickly and efficiently biodegraded with the enhanced CH_4 production. This rapid degradation was due to the presence of easily accessible soluble organic matter for the acidogenic and methanogenic microorganisms for the enhanced CH_4 production (Hu et al., 2016). The biodegradation of untreated PPMS took more time with less CH_4 production. This is because of the inherent recalcitrant structure of lignocellulose content (Zheng et al., 2014) in PPMS. Thus, it depicting the necessity of electrohydrolysis pretreatment to cut down (or) speedup the hydrolysis step in anaerobic digestion of PPMS for the enhanced quantity of CH_4 production. After the electrohydrolysis pretreatment, CH_4 production potential was increased from 274 ± 5 to 301 ± 4 mL CH_4/g VS in PPMS.


4 Conclusion

The novel study revealed that electrohydrolysis pretreatment has significant effect on lignocellulose content in speedup the hydrolysis step in anaerobic digestion process. It was perceived that the organic and inorganic compounds were efficiently solubilized at 15 V for 45 min in electrohydrolysis pretreatment. Compositional and instrumental analysis such as FESEM, XRD, and FT-IR spectra showed that the electrohydrolysis pretreatment has strongly affect the lignocellulose structures. Batch study revealed that CH_4 production potential was increased from 274 ± 5 to 301 ± 4 mL CH_4/g VS in pulp and paper mill sludge after pretreatment.


Appendix A Supplementary data

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2017.03.137.


Appendix A Supplementary data

