TITLE: Chemical pretreatment of lignocellulosic agroindustrial waste for methane production


1 Introduction

Anaerobic digestion is a biological process, in which a microbial consortium degrades organic substrates in the absence of oxygen. This process is comprised of four main steps, namely hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis and methanogenesis, and results in the production of biogas, mainly composed of CH_4 and CO_2, and digestate. Anaerobic digestion has been widely used as an organic waste stabilization method, while lately it has been intensively studied as a promising alternative to traditional energy production technologies, due to its limited environmental impacts (Ariunbaatar et al., 2014; Zheng et al., 2014). This technology is characterized by a high potential for energy recovery, which makes it more efficient in terms of energy generation from organic materials, compared with other biological and thermo-chemical processes. The use of more sustainable energy sources instead of fossil fuels has nowadays become necessary, in order to effectively reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Anaerobic digestion represents a viable option for such a purpose, since it captures and utilizes the methane that would otherwise be naturally produced through the decomposition of organic materials deposited in landfills, and ultimately be released in the atmosphere (Bolado-Rodríguez et al., 2016; Song et al., 2014; Zheng et al., 2014).

Agricultural and agroindustrial waste and by-products represent viable feedstock for anaerobic digestion systems. Their use for such purpose is considered advantageous, since they are highly available in large amounts, while they can also be characterized as renewable and low cost resources (Fernández-Cegrí et al., 2012; Zhao et al., 2014; Zheng et al., 2014). Agroindustrial activities are particularly important in Mediterranean countries, since they represent a significant sector of the economy. Among the most widespread and profitable activities of this region, are the wine and olive oil production industries, as well as the citrus fruits, especially oranges, and cotton processing activities, with all of them resulting in the generation of large amounts of waste materials (Pellera and Gidarakos, 2016). However, the performance of anaerobic digestion of such substrates is often limited, due to their complex lignocellulosic composition. Cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin are the main components of lignocellulosic materials and among them, lignin is the most resistant to biodegradation, constituting the barrier preventing access of the microbes to cellulose (Fernández-Cegrí et al., 2012). The main structural and compositional characteristics of lignocellulosic biomass, which affect their degradability, are cellulose crystallinity, accessible surface area, degree of cellulose polymerization, presence of lignin and hemicellulose, and degree of hemicellulose acetylation. In order to overcome these obstacles, treatment is frequently applied prior to anaerobic digestion of such substrates (Zheng et al., 2014). The objective of any pretreatment method is to disrupt the complex structure of lignocellulosic materials, by reducing the crystallinity as well as the degree of polymerization of cellulose, partially polymerizing and removing hemicellulose, altering and removing lignin and increasing the surface area and porosity of the materials (Behera et al., 2014; Singh et al., 2015). A pretreatment process should be able to achieve an improvement in the digestibility of the treated material, while minimizing environmental pollution, having low energy requirements and limiting the production of potentially inhibiting degradation products, such as organic acids, furan derivatives and phenol compounds (Banerjee et al., 2016; Bolado-Rodríguez et al., 2016). Pretreatment methods, depending on their basic mode of action, can primarily be categorized as physical, chemical and biological, with each category including several separate technologies (Bolado-Rodríguez et al., 2016).

Compared with the other methods, chemical pretreatments are considered very promising, since they can be quite effective in degrading more complex-structured substrates (Behera et al., 2014; Song et al., 2014). Such methods can be performed by applying a variety of chemical processes of different natures. Chemical pretreatments with alkaline reagents involve the use of compounds such as sodium hydroxide, calcium hydroxide and aqueous ammonia (Liew et al., 2011; López González et al., 2013; Pellera et al., 2016; Sambusiti et al., 2013; Song et al., 2014), while in pretreatments with acid reagents both inorganic and organic acids, such as sulfuric acid, hydrochloric acid, phosphoric acid, acetic acid, citric acid, oxalic acid and maleic acid, are used (Amnuaycheewa et al., 2016; Assawamongkholsiri et al., 2013; Lim et al., 2013; Monlau et al., 2013; Scordia et al., 2011; Song et al., 2014; Tian et al., 2016). Oxidative treatments include ozonation (Ariunbaatar et al., 2014) and treatment with peroxides, with their majority particularly focusing on hydrogen peroxide (Monlau et al., 2012; Silverstein et al., 2007; Song et al., 2014). Other types of chemical pretreatments can utilize organic solvents (Kabir et al., 2014), as well as inorganic salts (Banerjee et al., 2016; Kang et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2009). The effectiveness of such pretreatments on different substrates, is highly dependent on the type of substrate, as well as on the type of method being used. In fact, different results will be obtained when treating different materials with the same pretreatment, as a result of the complexity and variability in lignocellulosic structures (Kang et al., 2013; Sambusiti et al., 2013; Zheng et al., 2014). At the same time, variations will also be observed in the results obtained through different pretreatments of the same substrate, since each method acts on different parts of the material (Song et al., 2014). Consequently, the investigation of various combinations of pretreatment methods and substrates is very useful for better understanding the particular effects of different treatments on specific types of materials. The present study makes a significant contribution to this challenging topic.

This study investigates the effect of chemical pretreatment on four of the most widespread solid agroindustrial waste of the Mediterranean region, namely winery waste (WW), cotton gin waste (CGW), olive pomace (OP) and juice industry waste (JW). The main objective was to determine the impact of such a treatment on the solubilization of these materials, as well as on their degradability under anaerobic conditions for methane production. For this purpose, a number of batch assays were conducted, in which different reagent dosages, process durations and temperatures were adopted. Pretreatment was applied using eight different chemical reagents, i.e. NaOH, NaHCO_3, NaCl, H_3Cit, AcOH, H_2O_2, Me_2CO and EtOH, in order to also determine the influence of different reagent natures (alkaline, acidic, saline, oxidative, organic) on the final results. Materials solubilization was assessed by analyzing the liquid fractions obtained after pretreatment for soluble chemical oxygen demand and total phenols concentrations, while Biochemical Methane Potential (BMP) assays were adopted for determining the methane potential of solid pretreated samples.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Substrates and inoculum

Four agroindustrial waste typical of the Mediterranean area were used in the present study. More specifically, winery waste (WW), composed of grape skins, seeds and stalks, cotton gin waste (CGW) comprising of cotton fiber, stalks, bur and leaves, olive pomace (OP), which is the solid waste obtained in three-phase olive mills and juice industry waste (JW) comprised of orange peels. Sample handling was not the same for the four substrates, due to their different characteristics. For WW and JW, the materials were initially separated in batches, placed in zip-lock bags and stored in a freezer at −20 °C. One day before each use, appropriate amounts of the materials were transferred to 4 °C and on the day of the experiment they were comminuted without drying using a food processor. On the other hand, CGW was immediately dried at 60 °C and then comminuted to a particle size less than 500 μm, using a universal cutting mill, while OP was immediately stored at −20 °C without size reduction. The full characterization of the four substrates has been performed in a previous study (Pellera and Gidarakos, 2016).

The inoculum used in this study consisted of mesophilic anaerobic sludge with total solids (TS) and volatile solids (VS) contents of 2.02% and 1.35%, respectively, (VS/TS = 0.67), and it was obtained from an anaerobic digester situated in the Municipal Wastewater Treatment Facility of Chania, Crete.


2.2 Chemical pretreatment

Chemical pretreatment was conducted by using eight different reagents, i.e. sodium hydroxide (NaOH), sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO_3), citric acid (H_3Cit), acetic acid (AcOH), sodium chloride (NaCl), hydrogen peroxide (H_2O_2), acetone (Me_2CO) and ethanol (EtOH). Moreover, the effect of operating parameters, such as reagent dosage, process duration and process temperature was evaluated by investigating three different condition sets (Sets A, B and C) for each reagent. The specific experimental conditions for each set were selected on the basis of the results of a previous study (Pellera et al., 2016), in which the alkaline (NaOH) pretreatment of olive pomace was investigated by testing five values for reagent dosage (0–4 mmol/g VS) and five values for process duration (1–24 h) at two different temperatures (25 and 90 °C). The final selected conditions can be seen in Table 1 .

During the experimental procedure, initially, appropriate amounts of substrates (1 g VS) and reagent solutions (100 mL) were introduced in 250 mL glass flasks. Subsequently, the flasks were covered with an aluminum foil and were kept at each appropriate temperature for the predetermined time periods. In order to maintain a constant temperature, either an incubator (for the process conducted at 25 °C) or an oven (for the processes conducted at 60 and 90 °C) were used. After the end of the pretreatment process, the final pH of the slurries was measured and the samples were then centrifuged at 3900 rpm for 15 min, in order to separately collect the solid and liquid fractions. The latter were filtered through a 0.45 μm pore size membrane filter, for sCOD and TPH concentrations determination, while the former were stored at −20 °C until further use. Moreover, a portion of each solid sample was dried at 60 °C for further analyses, which included the determination of TS and VS contents, as well as elemental (CHNS) and fiber composition. All chemical pretreatment experiments were performed in triplicate.


2.3 Biochemical methane potential assays

The experimental apparatus for BMP (biochemical methane potential) assays consisted of 250 mL conical flasks covered with rubber stoppers. Three PVC (Polyvinyl chloride) tubes were inserted in the stoppers, which allowed N_2 flushing in the flasks, daily methane measurement and weekly sampling for pH measurement and TPH determination.

The working volume for the BMP assays was set to 100 mL, the inoculum quantity was the same for all assays, i.e. 15 g VS/L, while the substrate to inoculum ratio (SIR) on a VS basis (g VS_substrate/g VS_inoculum) was 0.5 for WW and JW and 0.25 for CGW and OP. These values were chosen on the basis of the results of a previous study (Pellera and Gidarakos, 2016). Blank assays (SIR = 0), containing only the inoculum were also performed, in order to determine the residual methane potential of the inoculum and to then be able to calculate the net methane potential of each substrate.

BMP assays were carried out by firstly introducing the inoculum and substrates in the flasks, in appropriate amounts and by subsequently adding deionized water to the mixture, if needed, in order to bring the total volume to approximately 100 mL. After adjusting the pH of the mixture at 7.8 ± 0.05, the flasks were covered with the rubber stoppers and then flushed with N_2 for 2 min. The reactors were finally placed in an incubator set at 35 °C. Methane production was measured daily for the first seven days of incubation and subsequently every two days. BMP assays were terminated when methane production was undetectable or less than 5% of the total amount. All assays were performed in duplicate.


2.4 Analytical methods

TS and VS contents were determined according to APHA (American Public Health Association) method 2540G. Elemental analysis (C, H, N, S) of the substrates was performed using an EA300 Euro Vector elemental analyzer, via flash combustion at 1020 °C. The oxygen content was determined by difference, considering the VS content of each sample. pH was determined using a portable pH-meter. The sCOD concentrations in the liquid fractions obtained after pretreatment were determined through APHA method 5220C, while TPH concentrations were determined according to Folin-Ciocalteu’s method, on the basis of the procedure described by Singleton et al. (1999). A description of the latter procedure is given in a previous study (Pellera et al., 2016). The final TPH concentrations are expressed in gallic acid equivalents (GAE). Fiber analysis, i.e. the determination of NDF (Neutral Detergent Fiber), ADF (Acid Detergent Fiber) and ADL (Acid Detergent Lignin), was based on the method described by Fernández-Cegrí et al. (2012). Methane production was determined by means of volume displacement using an 11.2% KOH solution, as it was done in the studies conducted by Altaş (2009) and Nain and Jawed (2006). The procedure used for methane volume determination is described in a previous study (Pellera and Gidarakos, 2017).


3 Data analysis


3.1 Pretreatment mass yields

The yield of the chemical pretreatment process in terms of mass recovery was estimated by calculating three different mass yield values for each pretreated sample, namely Y_Wet, Y_TS and Y_VS. More specifically, the calculations were made by using Eq. (1) and considering the initial mass of substrate (m_i) and the mass of sample obtained after each investigated pretreatment (m_p), with the values being expressed in three different ways, i.e. (a) gWet_pretreated _sample/gWet_raw _sample for Y_Wet, (b) gTS_pretreated _sample/gTS_raw _sample for Y_TS and (c) g VS_pretreated _sample/g VS_raw _sample for Y_VS. FORMULA: Y = m p m i


3.2 Theoretical methane potential

The Theoretical Methane Potential (TMP) of the chemically pretreated samples at Standard Temperature and Pressure (STP) conditions was estimated through their elemental composition and the stoichiometry of the degradation reaction, as suggested by Lesteur et al. (2010).


3.3 Specific methane yield

The Specific Methane Yield (SMY) of each chemically pretreated sample, resulting after the end of digestion, was obtained by subtracting the ultimate cumulative methane production of the blank assay (mL CH_4) from the ultimate cumulative methane production of each assay containing the pretreated samples, and by subsequently dividing it either by the total amount of VS of the pretreated samples being added to each reactor, or by the corresponding amount of VS of the raw substrates, calculated on the basis of the mass yields of the pretreatment process. These values were then converted to STP conditions. This way, the SMY was expressed in two different ways, namely SMY_P (mL CH_4, _STP/g VS_P) and SMY_Raw (mL CH_4, _STP/g VS_Raw), respectively.


3.4 Solubilization

COD solubilization (%) was calculated using the Theoretical Oxygen Demand (TOD) (mg O_2/g VS) of the raw substrates and the sCOD (mg O_2/g VS) values determined for each substrate after chemical pretreatment at different conditions, according to Eq. (2). It is noted that the TOD values of the raw substrates were estimated in a previous study (Pellera and Gidarakos, 2016). FORMULA: COD solubilization [ % ] = sCOD TOD · 100


3.5 Biodegradability index

The Biodegradability Index (BI) was calculated using the TMP (mL CH_4, _STP/g VS) and the SMY_P (mL CH_4, _STP/g VS_P) of each pretreated sample, as it is shown in Eq. (3). FORMULA: BI [ % ] = SMY P TMP · 100


3.6 Kinetic modeling

Methane production was modeled by fitting the data with two kinetic models through non-linear regression, using the Solver tool of Microsoft Office Excel. The goodness of fit was evaluated by taking into consideration both the Residual Sum of Squares (RSS) and the R-square (R^2) values. The first-order exponential and the transference (reaction-curve) models were used (Donoso-Bravo et al., 2010), which are described by Eqs. (4) and (5), respectively. FORMULA: B = P · [ 1 - exp ( - kt ) ] FORMULA: B = P · 1 - exp - R m · ( t - λ ) P where t is time (d), B is the cumulative methane production at time t (mL CH_4), P is the methane production potential (mL CH_4), R_m is the maximum methane production rate (mL CH_4/d), k is the rate constant (d^−1) and λ is the lag phase (d).


3.7 Energy calculations

The specific energy consumption, E_C (kJ/kg VS), resulting from the pretreatment process was calculated according to Eq. (6) (Kuglarz et al., 2013). FORMULA: E C = P W · t E m where P_W is the power of the oven (888 W), t_E is the exposure time (s) and m is the mass of VS of raw substrate being subjected to pretreatment (kg VS).

The specific energy corresponding to the methane quantity produced from the pretreated samples, E_M (kJ/kg VS), was calculated according to Eq. (7) (Passos et al., 2013). FORMULA: E M = SMY Raw · ξ 1000 where ξ is the lower heating value of methane (35,800 kJ/m^3 CH_4).

Considering that pretreatment temperatures of 60 and 90 °C are higher than the temperature of the mesophilic anaerobic digestion (35 °C), the pretreated samples would require an intermediate cooling procedure, which would result in the release of energy in the form of heat. The specific energy corresponding to the potential recovery of the latter amount of energy, E_Q (kJ/kg VS), was calculated according to Eq. (8) (Ma et al., 2011). FORMULA: E Q = [ m s · C P , s · Δ T + m w · C P , w · Δ T ] m where m_s is the mass (kg) of dry solids of substrate being subjected to pretreatment, m_w is the mass (kg) of water in the vessel during pretreatment (including the water contained in the substrate), C_P _, _s and C_P _, _w are the specific heat capacities of solids (1.95 kJ/kg °C) and water (4.18 kJ/kg °C), respectively and ΔT is the temperature difference (°C) between the temperature of the slurry at the end of pretreatment and the temperature of the mesophilic anaerobic digestion.

The specific energy profit of the pretreatment, E_T (kJ/kg VS), was calculated considering E_M, E_Q and E_C, according to Eq. (9) (Kuglarz et al., 2013). FORMULA: E T = E M + E Q - E C with the sum of E_M and E_Q comprising the specific energy output, E_o (kJ/kg VS), and E_C constituting the specific energy input E_i (kJ/kg VS).

In order to be able to provide an energy balance for the chemical pretreatment process applied in the present study, all the above mentioned energy parameters were expressed as kJ per kg of VS of raw (untreated) substrate, aiming at a more accurate approach.


3.8 Statistical analysis

Statistical analysis of the data obtained from pretreatment experiments was performed using Microsoft Office Excel. More specifically, significant differences between the data obtained for different reagents and for different condition sets were determined by performing Student’s t-Test. Two-tailed p-values were evaluated, considering three significance levels, namely p < 0.01, p < 0.05 and p < 0.1.


4 Results and discussion


4.1 Effect of pretreatment on solubilization


4.1.1 sCOD and TPH

Fig. 1 and Table 2 show the results regarding sCOD solubilization during chemical pretreatment of the substrates, while Fig. 2 presents the corresponding data referring to TPH release. Both these parameters were determined, as they can be good indicators for evaluating the degree of substrate solubilization (Bolado-Rodríguez et al., 2016; López González et al., 2013), especially in combination.

It is generally noticed that increasing the severity of pretreatment, mainly in terms of temperature and reagent dosage leads to higher material solubilization. Specifically, the data revealed that treatments B and C, in most cases, eventually resulted in higher organic matter release compared with treatment A. In fact, it was observed that, for most reagents, one of two cases was manifested, i.e. either sCOD concentrations being released through treatment C were more significantly different (lower p values) than the respective concentrations obtained through treatments A and B, or both treatments B and C resulted in more significantly different concentrations compared with those corresponding to treatment A. The above are true for three of the investigated substrates, namely CGW (Fig. 1b), OP (Fig. 1c) and JW (Fig. 1d). There are only a few exceptions, for which no accurate conclusions could be drawn, specifically those of NaOH, NaHCO_3 and AcOH for CGW, of NaCl for OP and of AcOH and Me_2CO for JW. Conversely, in the case of WW (Fig. 1a), although mean values appear to generally follow an increasing trend as a function of pretreatment severity, differences between treatments A, B and C for each reagent separately, could not be considered highly significant (p > 0.1), except for a few cases.

Similar observations can generally be made regarding TPH release (Fig. 2). Nevertheless, in this case, the impact being exerted by treatment C, appears to be more significant. This is also confirmed by the statistical analysis of the data, which demonstrated that the values obtained through the application of treatment C, are, in the majority of cases, more significantly different (lower p values) from those obtained through treatments A and B.

When comparing the impact of different reagents on substrate solubilization, it is noticed that considering each substrate separately, the application of treatment A (milder conditions) results in similar sCOD release for different reagents, with significant differences (p < 0.05) being noticed only for CGW and OP, and only between certain values. The different impact of each reagent is more visible as the treatment severity increases from A to B, while further increase from B to C, causes not only a more pronounced difference between reagents, but also a change in the order concerning their effectiveness. Differences in substrates solubilization with the use of different reagents may be attributed to their properties and the manner in which they affect such substrates. In fact, alkaline, acid and oxidative pretreatments, all cause an increase in the accessible surface area of lignocellulosic materials. However, while the action of alkaline reagents is concentrated more on lignin and less on hemicellulose solubilization, acid reagents act more on the structure of cellulose and hemicellulose (Zheng et al., 2014). More specifically, alkaline pretreatments are known to cause swelling to lignocellulosic materials, as a result of solvation and saphonication reactions. In contrast, acid pretreatments lead to the disruption of covalent bonds, hydrogen bonds, and Van der Waals forces connecting the various components of such materials (Song et al., 2014). In treatments using H_2O_2, the strong oxidative action of the reagent, as well as the release of hydroxyl radicals help not only disrupt lignin and hemicellulose structures, but also make a portion of cellulose more available to microorganisms (Zheng et al., 2014). On the other hand, organic solvents, such as EtOH can cause partial lignin hydrolysis, as well as hemicellulose solubilization, due to their impact on internal lignin bonds and bonds between lignin and hemicellulose (Behera et al., 2014; Kabir et al., 2014). Finally, the use of inorganic salts, such as NaCl has resulted quite effective for hemicellulose degradation (Liu et al., 2009) and removal of the loosely bound portion of lignin (Banerjee et al., 2016). Overall, the reagents which appeared to be the most effective in solubilizing the studied substrates, by resulting in not only higher, but also more significantly different values, were H_3Cit and EtOH for WW, CGW and JW, as well as H_3Cit, EtOH and NaOH for OP. Moreover, treatments with H_2O_2, Me_2CO and AcOH, also resulted in significantly different values, in several cases. Nevertheless, among the two organic acids, and among the two organic solvents, H_3Cit and EtOH, respectively, were the reagents that repeatedly resulted in significantly higher (p < 0.05 or 0.01) sCOD solubilization. On the basis of these results, it was decided that only certain pretreatments would be used to produce the samples for subsequent BMP assays. This selection was made, aiming at investigating two condition sets and one sample of each reagent category, with the exception of alkalines. In fact, alkaline processes served more for comparison purposes, considering that they are the most widely adopted in literature among chemical pretreatments. Therefore, one acid, one oxidant and one organic solvent, namely H_3Cit, H_2O_2 and EtOH, were chosen. At the same time, condition sets B and C were also selected, as they were generally associated with higher substrate solubilization.


4.1.2 pH

The changes in the pH of the slurries at the end of each pretreatment are depicted in Fig. 3 , where hollow markers represent the initial pH of each solution. After pretreatment was concluded, the final pH of the slurries containing CGW and OP was reduced in the cases of NaOH, NaHCO_3 and NaCl, while it was increased for H_3Cit, AcOH, H_2O_2, Me_2CO and EtOH (except for OP with treatment A). Decreased pH values after chemical pretreatment have also been observed in previous studies where NaOH (Sambusiti et al., 2013) and Ca(OH)_2 (Fernandes et al., 2009) were used as reagents. This phenomenon is generally attributed to the release of substances, such as organic acids and phenolic compounds, as a result of lignin degradation (Bolado-Rodríguez et al., 2016). On the other hand, increased pH values were found by Zhao et al. (2010), Fernandes et al. (2009) and Zhao et al. (2014) after pretreatment with acetic-propionic acid, maleic acid and acetic acid, respectively. This pH increase could be associated to the consumption of hydrogen ions in the hydrolysis reaction being developed during pretreatment (Zhao et al., 2010). In contrast with the above mentioned results, for WW and JW, pH was found decreased in all treatments, except for those where the two acids (H_3Cit, AcOH) were used. Consequently, in these two cases, pH reduction for H_2O_2, Me_2CO and EtOH treatments, may be attributed to the nature of WW and JW, since both of them are materials of acidic character.


4.2 Moisture, VS contents and elemental composition of chemically pretreated samples

The composition of chemically pretreated samples is presented in Table 3 . Results show that chemical pretreatment led to the production of samples with higher moisture contents, i.e. lower TS contents, compared with the untreated substrates. This suggests that due to the nature of the pretreatment process, some moisture quantity originating from each reagent solution being used, was probably retained within the mass of the samples in the form of free moisture, thus resulting in higher contents. The most significant variation was noticed for CGW with an increase ranging from 38 to 49%, while the substrate which was affected the least is OP, with an increase between 0.4 and 9%. As far as VS/TS is concerned, these values are also found increased after pretreatment, with the least affected substrate in this case being JW. Different types of reagents do not seem to have caused significantly different effects regarding this parameter. Nevertheless, increasing the severity of pretreatment (form B to C) resulted in generally stable values characterized by a slightly increasing trend for all reagents. Tian et al. (2016) also noticed higher values for VS/TS after chemical pretreatment of corn stover with H_2SO_4, AcOH and H_3PO_4, with the increase in acid concentration resulting in a stable behavior. Moreover, in two other studies (Asadieraghi and Wan Daud, 2014; Jiang et al., 2013) the authors found increased volatile matter contents for lignocellulosic materials being chemically treated with different acids.

Elemental analysis of pretreated samples revealed uniformity in the general effect of pretreatment on the elemental composition of the substrates. In fact, C and H contents of samples obtained after chemical pretreatment were found increased in comparison with the respective values of the untreated substrates. In contrast, O contents were reduced, while the variation of N contents was dependent on each material. These results are in agreement with those found by Lim et al. (2013), Jiang et al. (2013) and Asadieraghi and Wan Daud (2014), who in their respective studies also observed increased C and H contents, as well as decreased O contents, after the application of chemical treatments. Moreover, it is noticed that, depending on the substrate, chemical pretreatment impacted each element at a different degree. In fact, for all three reagents being investigated, H content was the most affected by pretreatment in the cases of WW, CGW and JW, while in the case of OP, N content sustained the most significant variation. Nevertheless, when comparing the different types of reagents it is evident that the H and C contents of WW were affected the most by H_2O_2 and EtOH treatments, respectively, independently of severity, while the N content was particularly impacted by the H_3Cit-C and H_2O_2-C treatments. Similarly, H_2O_2-C and EtOH-C treatments exerted the most pronounced effect on C and H contents of JW, while H_2O_2-B and EtOH-B had the most significant effect on N content. H_3Cit was the reagent causing the most important effect on C and H contents of CGW, while both H_2O_2 and EtOH had an analogous result on its N content. In the case of OP, N was much impacted by H_3Cit and H_2O_2, H by EtOH and C by the H_2O_2-C and EtOH-B treatments. C/N and C/H values were affected accordingly, as a result of the different degree of impact of each pretreatment on each element. Specifically, C/H was found reduced, while C/N was found more elevated for pretreated samples compared with untreated substrates. A few exceptions were observed for C/N, i.e. WW-samples obtained after H_3Cit-C and H_2O_2-C treatments and the JW-sample generated through the H_3Cit-C treatment. All the above mentioned variations in the elemental composition of the pretreated materials may be explained by the fact that during pretreatment, a portion of the organic compounds present on the substrates matrices was released in the liquid fraction, while leaving another portion still on the solid fraction. This, depending on the composition of the latter substances, would have possibly increased the percentages of some of the elements for the solid fraction. Furthermore, the variation in C/H in particular, has previously been associated with such phenomena (Lim et al., 2013; Jiang et al., 2013) and strongly encourages this supposition. As far as pretreatment severity is concerned, the variation in reagent dosage and process temperature led to the development of coinciding trends for C and H contents, considering all investigated reagents and for all substrates. More specifically, the use of H_3Cit and EtOH at increasing severities results in a decreasing trend for WW and OP, while the exact opposite is observed for CGW and JW. On the other hand, when using H_2O_2, C and H contents are decreased only for WW, while for the remaining substrates they are increased. Regarding N content, the observed behavior seems to be dependent on each substrate, since the only cases in which these trends coincide with those of C and H contents are those of CGW and OP for H_3Cit, those of CGW and JW for H_2O_2 and that of JW for EtOH. Finally, while the trends in C/N values are found to agree with those of N contents for all reagents and substrates, those of C/H follow different patterns. In fact, the H_3Cit treatments resulted in a decreasing trend for all substrates, the H_2O_2 treatments caused a decrease for WW, no detectable change for CGW and an increase for OP and JW, while the EtOH treatments led to increasing values for WW and CGW and to decreasing values for OP and JW. Song et al. (2012) observed a decrease in the total carbon content and an increase in the total nitrogen content of rice straw after chemical pretreatment with increasing reagent concentration, while in another study (Song et al., 2014), in which seven different reagents were used on corn straw, the authors observed a decreasing trend for C contents and C/N values, as they increased the concentrations of the reagents. The results of the present study are found to partially agree with these literature results.

It is worth mentioning that S contents are not included in ultimate analysis results, since all values were below the detection limit of the instrument (0.01%).


4.3 Pretreatment mass yields

As it can be seen in Table 4 , the mass yields of the chemical pretreatment process were calculated in three different ways, namely Y_Wet, Y_TS and Y_VS, in order to be able to express this parameter on a wet sample, a total solids and a volatile solids basis, respectively. As it is immediately made evident by Y_Wet values greater than unity, chemical pretreatment results in final samples of higher mass compared with the untreated substrates. This may be explained by the higher moisture retention within the mass of each material during the pretreatment process, as it was observed earlier (Section 4.2). Y_TS and Y_VS values for each separate sample are very close to each other however in most cases the latter are greater than the former. This indicates that, although the thermo-chemical reaction between the investigated reagents and biomass, most likely resulted in the removal of both degradable and non-degradable, i.e. inorganic, matter from the substrates (Appels et al., 2010; Asadieraghi and Wan Daud, 2014; Jiang et al., 2013), the solids being ultimately retained in each pretreated sample, are for the most part comprised of degradable matter. Furthermore, it is observed that solids retention in the majority of cases usually diminishes with the application of processes of higher severity. Similar results have also been observed in previous studies involving chemical pretreatment of materials of similar nature. Silverstein et al. (2007) found that solids retention diminished after treating cotton stalks with H_2SO_4, NaOH and H_2O_2 at increasing reagent concentrations and reaction time, while Park et al. (2015) made a similar observation when increasing the concentrations of HNO_3, H_2SO_4, NaOH and Ca(OH)_2 during pretreatment of rice straw. An analogous trend was also noticed by Kang et al. (2013) when treating Miscanthus straw with five inorganic salts at increasing temperature, concentration and pretreatment time. Nevertheless, in the present study there are also some cases in which opposite observations are true, i.e. solids retention increases. Specifically, these are the EtOH treatment of WW, the H_2O_2 treatment of CGW and the H_3Cit and H_2O_2 treatments of OP. As far as the latter substrate is concerned, another interesting observation is the fact that both Y_TS and Y_VS values are slightly greater than unity. This is indicative of an increase in the TS and VS contents of these specific pretreated samples. The experimental procedure followed during pretreatment did not include rinsing the solid fractions recovered after centrifugation and filtration. This implies that whichever substances were contained in the free moisture being retained within the mass of the pretreated samples (as mentioned in Section 4.2) would have not been removed from the solid fraction, thus eventually contributing to the final solids contents of the samples. These substances may include not only residues from the reagents being used during pretreatment, but also condensed degradation compounds. In fact, it has been reported that the soluble compounds (e.g. phenols) being generated after the disruption of lignocellulosic structures, i.e. the solubilization of lignin and hemicellulose and the breakage of their internal bonds, can often be condensed through the appropriate reactions, sometimes even with each other, at both higher and lower temperatures, including room temperature (Klinke et al., 2004; López González et al., 2013; Scordia et al., 2011). The above mentioned phenomena would have occurred for all samples to some extent, however, the results indicate that they may have been more pronounced in the case of OP, probably due to its specific characteristics and composition, which includes compounds such as sugars, volatile acids, polyphenols, polyalcohols, proteins and pigments (Karantonis et al., 2008).


4.4 Effect of pretreatment on substrate degradability


4.4.1 Methane production during BMP assays

As mentioned earlier, only six out of the twenty-four samples obtained for each substrate (WW, CGW, OP and JW) were chosen for BMP assays. Namely, the chosen samples were those resulting after pretreatment with H_3Cit, H_2O_2 and EtOH, under condition sets B and C.

Fig. 4 shows the cumulative methane production of the above mentioned samples, while Table 5 presents the specific methane yields (SMY) of the pretreated samples, as well as the biodegradability indices (BI) calculated based on the TMP of each pretreated sample. SMY are expressed on the basis of both the added amount of VS and the amount of VS corresponding to the untreated (raw) substrate.

As it can be seen from the results, milder treatments (B) had a more positive outcome, compared with the more severe treatments (C) when H_3Cit and H_2O_2 were used, while the opposite is true in the cases where EtOH was the reagent of choice. There are only two exceptions to the above mentioned observations, where the opposite is noticed. Specifically, for WW the EtOH-B treatment yielded a higher methane potential than the EtOH-C treatment, while the H_3Cit-C treatment prevailed the H_3Cit-B treatment in the case of CGW. In a similar study, Monlau et al. (2012) compared different pretreatments of sunflower stalks and observed that an intermediate pretreatment temperature around 55 °C was more effective than 80 °C, for methane production, when using H_2O_2, as well as alkaline reagents.

When comparing the three reagents for each separate treatment, it is noticed that the EtOH-treated WW samples provide the highest methane yields for both B- and C-treatments, while for OP, the samples treated with H_3Cit appear to be prevailing at both condition sets, although for the latter substrate, for treatment C the difference from the EtOH-treated sample is only slight. In the cases of CGW and JW on the other hand, treatments H_2O_2-B and EtOH-C provided the materials with the highest methane yields for each condition set, with the respective values being quite close. Similar results have been observed in previous studies as well. In fact, when Amnuaycheewa et al. (2016) compared various organic acids for the pretreatment of rice straw, they found that citric acid was the one providing the best results concerning the enhancement of biogas production. Moreover, Kabir et al. (2014) have reported that organic acids and low molecular weight alcohols are produced during anaerobic digestion as intermediate products; therefore their eventual presence not only does not cause inhibition to the process, since they are easily degradable, but may also be beneficial to it. Consequently, it can be assumed that any eventual residues of H_3Cit and EtOH remained on the substrates after pretreatment, probably did not have such a negative effect on methane production, as the residues of the other reagents may have had, hence the more positive results observed for these substrates. Overall, the highest methane yields (SMY_P, mL CH_4, _STP/g VS_P) were obtained after the EtOH-B, EtOH-C, H_3Cit-B and H_2O_2-B pretreatments for WW, CGW, OP and JW, respectively. A similar behavior can be observed when referring to the SMY expressed as SMY_Raw (mL CH_4, _STP/g VS_Raw), as well as to the corresponding BI (%) values. There are only two exceptions in which SMY_Raw follow the opposite trends compared with SMY_P. More specifically, this is noticed for the two H_3Cit-treated OP-samples and the two EtOH-treated JW-samples. Interestingly, in these same cases BI trends are also found to disagree with SMY_P trends, while being in accordance with SMY_Raw trends. The only additional case in which there is an absolute disagreement between SMY and BI is for the H_3Cit-treated WW-samples, for which however the difference in degradability can be considered negligible. The fact that SMY are mostly in accordance with BI values corroborate the supposition regarding the effects of these specific pretreatments on the investigated substrates, i.e. that higher methane potentials are linked to higher biodegradability levels.

It is worth mentioning that while SMY_Raw are lower than SMY_P for WW, CGW and JW, in the case of OP the opposite is seen. This is related to the high mass yield values observed for this substrate. Moreover, when comparing the aforementioned results with the SMY of the untreated substrates (Pellera and Gidarakos, 2016), namely 446.2, 268.0, 258.7 and 446.0 mL CH_4, _STP/g VS for WW, CGW, OP and JW, respectively, it is evident that pretreated materials present generally lower methane potentials, with the exception of the CGW-sample generated after the EtOH-C treatment, for which the SMY_P seems to exceed the one obtained for the untreated substrate. Reduced methane potentials after chemical pretreatment were observed in a previous study as well (Pellera et al., 2016) and may be attributed to the loss of a portion of degradable matter initially present on the solid matrix of the substrates and its transfer to the liquid phase as a result of pretreatment (Fernández-Cegrí et al., 2012).

Ultimately, the obtained results reveal that different pretreatment severities have different effects on the degradability of the produced materials. In fact, while for WW moderate severity processes seem to generally be more appropriate for subsequent methane production, in the case of CGW this is true only when using H_2O_2, with more severe conditions being more fruitful for the latter substrate when using H_3Cit and EtOH. As far as OP and JW are concerned, moderate conditions appear to be more suitable when applying H_3Cit and H_2O_2 treatments, while the EtOH treatments give more satisfactory results when adopted at a higher severity.


4.4.2 pH and TPH during BMP assays

During the BMP assays weekly samples of the digestion slurry were withdrawn from the reactors, in order to determine the pH (Fig. 5 ) and TPH (Fig. 6 ) concentrations in their interior.

As it is shown in Fig. 5, pH values on day 1 of incubation are found decreased compared with the initially adjusted value of 7.8, with this phenomenon being particularly pronounced for the assays corresponding to JW-samples. In fact, in these particular cases pH reaches values as low as 6.75. After the first week of incubation, a further decrease in pH can generally be noticed (until day 15), most likely due to the accumulation of organic acids during the initial stages of the digestion process (Liew et al., 2011; Song et al., 2014). This observation is true for all assays except for those containing JW-samples, for which the pH increases instead, showing a tendency towards the stabilization of the systems. Afterwards, beyond day 7, pH profiles tend to show similar patterns among substrates, with a slight initial increasing trend (after day 15) and subsequent small fluctuations around a close range of values. On the other hand, JW-assays show a continuous increasing trend with time. This latter behavior of pH can be attributed to the consumption of the previously produced acids (Song et al., 2012). Results following patterns similar to those observed in the present study were also found in the studies conducted by Zhang et al. (2011), Song et al. (2012, 2014) and Liew et al. (2011). No significant differences can be noticed regarding pH, nor between treatments using different reagents or between treatments of different severity. This suggests that the reagent residues that eventually remained on the pretreated samples were most probably in a quantity that apparently did not exert an inhibitory effect on anaerobic digestion.

The results regarding the variation of TPH concentrations in the digestion slurries are depicted in Fig. 6. An initial increasing behavior is observed during the first weeks of incubation for all substrates. More specifically, for the assays corresponding to WW (Fig. 6a), CGW (Fig. 6b) and OP (Fig. 6c), most peak values are found on day 15, with some others being noticed later during digestion (days 21 and 27). On the other hand, in the case of JW-samples (Fig. 6d) TPH concentrations reach their maximum within the first week of incubation (day 7). Interestingly, the higher presence of these compounds coincides with the manifestation of lower pH values, which was mentioned earlier. This suggests that a significant amount of degradable organic material was consumed during these periods, thus causing the more pronounced release of phenolic compounds and organic acids and in turn the lower pH levels. Following this initial period of higher TPH levels, a continuous decreasing trend is developed, especially after day 27, with similar variation patterns being observed for all assays, corroborating the stabilization tendency inferred by the earlier discussed corresponding pH values. Furthermore, it is noted that there are no significant variations among different treatments confirming the absence of particularly inhibitory factors.


4.4.3 Kinetic modeling of BMP data

The results obtained by fitting the methane production data to both the first-order exponential and the transference models are presented in Table 6 . Data fitting for both models resulted in the same values for P and R ^2, hence the combined presentation of the data. The models were found to describe the experimental data at an acceptable level for all samples. Chemical pretreatment appears to have affected the anaerobic digestion kinetics of each investigated substrate differently. Indeed, the rate constant (k) values obtained for WW and CGW seem to generally follow an increasing trend with the variation in pretreatment severity from B to C, for all reagents being used. These results imply the development of a digestion process at a slightly faster rate with an increase in the severity of pretreatment. The opposite is observed for OP and JW, suggesting that a more intense pretreatment may retard digestion in these cases. López González et al. (2013), who focused on thermo-chemical pretreatment of press mud, also obtained lower k values for the data corresponding to higher severities. As far as the maximum methane production rate (R_m) is concerned, although the highest values correspond to the samples with the maximum SMY and BI, the trends followed by the data of these three parameters do not always coincide. In fact, when comparing the results presented in Table 5 with those of Table 6, it can be noticed than the behavior of R_m in certain cases coincides with the behavior of either the SMY or the BI. These findings suggest that the maximum methane production rate for a specific substrate is evidently in correlation with its biodegradability.


4.5 Fiber composition of chemically pretreated samples

In order to better understand the effect of the pretreatments on each substrate, the fiber composition of the chemically pretreated samples with the highest SMY was determined. Table 7 presents the NDF, ADF and ADL contents of the pretreated samples, as well as of the respective raw substrates, expressed as a percentage of TS. Additionally, the ADL content was also expressed as a percentage of the ADF content. NDF includes hemicellulose, cellulose and lignin, ADF includes cellulose and lignin, while ADL represents lignin. As it can be seen from the results, in all cases the pretreatments seem to have produced samples with an increased NDF content compared with the untreated substrates. In other words, this suggests that the pretreatments in addition to causing the partial disruption of the substrates matrices, also induced the release of the easily degradable organic matter of each substrate, thus leaving solid samples with higher fiber contents. The ADF contents were also higher after pretreatment, while the ADL contents (%TS) were decreased for WW and OP and increased for CGW and JW. Nevertheless, when ADL values are expressed as a percentage of the ADF contents, they are found reduced in all cases, except for JW. These results would imply that all lignocellulosic components were affected by pretreatment to some degree. However, in the case of WW, hemicellulose and lignin appear to have been affected the most, while for CGW, OP and JW, this is the case for cellulose and lignin. Moreover, for CGW and OP, lignin in particular, seems to have suffered a higher reduction, while for JW, results indicate a more pronounced reduction for cellulose. Previous studies, where chemical pretreatments using H_3Cit (Amnuaycheewa et al., 2016), H_2O_2 (Song et al., 2012, 2014) and EtOH (Kabir et al., 2014) were applied to lignocellulosic substrates, have also examined the fiber composition of pretreated samples. Both Amnuaycheewa et al. (2016) and Song et al. (2012) observed decreased cellulose and lignin contents for pretreated rice straw, while a similar tendency was observed in another study treating corn stover (Song et al., 2014). On the other hand, in the study conducted by Kabir et al. (2014) a decrease in the hemicellulose and lignin contents of forest residues was combined with an increase in their cellulose content.


4.6 Energy considerations

The energy requirements for chemical pretreatment of the investigated substrates at different conditions, as well as the energy recovered in the form of heat and methane were calculated in order to provide the energy balance presented in Table 8 . It is noted that, the calculations regarding specific energy consumption (E_C) and specific energy released in the form of heat (E_Q) were made considering the maximum amount of substrate being introduced in the oven at each run of the pretreatment experiments. Specifically, a maximum of 21 flasks could be used at the same time, with each one containing 1 g of VS of substrate. Based on these information, apart from the values in kJ/kg VS, it is possible to calculate the E_C and the E_Q corresponding to each experimental run being conducted under the applied conditions, in order to treat 21 g VS of each substrate, corresponding to 81.2, 39.7, 40.2 and 102.5 g of Raw (untreated) WW, CGW, OP and JW, respectively. Considering that only the operating power of the oven and the pretreatment duration are used in their calculation, E_C values are the same for all substrates, specifically, equal to 25574.4 and to 12787.2 kJ, for treatments B and C, respectively. On the other hand, E_Q values differ for each substrate, i.e. WW, CGW, OP and JW, and are respectively equal to 4760, 4663, 4671 and 4808 kJ, for treatment B, while they are respectively equal to 10472, 10258, 10277 and 10577 kJ, for treatment C. Moreover, the specific energy production in the form of methane was calculated using the quantity of gas being produced from each pretreated sample at STP conditions.

It is evident that energy consumption is higher for B-treatments, due to their longer duration, i.e. 8 h compared with 4 h corresponding to C-treatments. On the other hand, larger amounts of energy produced in the form of heat are obtained from C-treatments, which are conducted at a higher temperature. Moreover, it is observed that for all reagents and at both condition sets, a negative energy balance is obtained, for all investigated substrates. Similar negative specific energy profits were also obtained by Kuglarz et al. (2013), when investigating thermal treatment of sludge at temperatures between 30 and 100 °C. Additionally, the values obtained for the energy ratio Ei/Eo, are higher than unity and between 5.1 and 5.4 for B-treatments and around 1.2 for C-treatments. All the above lead to the conclusion that the amount of energy that could potentially be recovered in the form of methane and heat, could not balance the energy requirements of the pretreatment processes that were applied under the specific conditions being adopted in this study. However, pretreatments performed at a higher temperature and a shorter duration (C-treatments) resulted in a more encouraging outcome, since both E_T and Ei/Eo are significantly lower for these treatments. A similar observation was also made by Passos et al. (2013) when determining the ratio between the energy consumed for thermal pretreatment of microalgae at 55, 75 and 95 °C, and the energy recovered from methane production. The energy ratios they obtained were greater than unity, albeit characterized by a decreasing trend with an increase in temperature. Taking into consideration the above observations, it can be concluded that the pretreatment processes used in the present study are not economically attractive when conducted under the applied conditions. Nevertheless, if appropriate adjustments were made, energy consumption could be reduced, thus improving the overall energy balance. More specifically, the use of a different heating system, with a lower operating power, should be considered. At the same time, increasing the density of the pretreatment slurry, i.e. the solid to liquid ratio, is worth investigating, since it would ensure a better exploitation of the energy being consumed during pretreatment, by maximizing the amount of substrate being treated. In fact, in a previous study involving low temperature thermal pretreatment of microalgal biomass (Passos et al., 2013), the authors obtained an improved energy balance when applying scenarios with more concentrated biomass.


5 Conclusions

This study aimed at evaluating the influence of chemical pretreatment on the solubilization and the degradability of four solid agroindustrial waste, namely winery waste (WW), cotton gin waste (CGW), olive pomace (OP) and juice industry waste (JW). In order to investigate the effect of different chemical natures, eight reagents were used, specifically NaOH, NaHCO_3, NaCl, H_3Cit, AcOH, H_2O_2, Me_2CO and EtOH, while for evaluating the impact of the process severity, pretreatment was conducted under three condition sets, by varying process duration, reagent dosage and temperature. Substrate solubilization was clearly positively associated with pretreatment severity, with H_3Cit, H_2O_2, and EtOH generally exhibiting the most statistically significant levels of effectiveness among reagents of the same category. It can be inferred that the effect of the pretreatment processes at different severities, is highly dependent not only on the mode of action of each reagent, but also on the substrate being treated. Fiber analysis confirmed that the chemical pretreatments in use, indeed altered the structure of the investigated substrates, resulting in cellulose and hemicellulose solubilization and in the breakage of the bonds connecting them to lignin. Ultimately, chemical pretreatment resulted in lower methane potentials compared with untreated substrates. Nevertheless, moderate to high severity conditions are recommended when treating substrates such as those investigated in the present study, for subsequent methane production. More specifically, while a moderate severity seems to be generally preferable when applying H_3Cit and H_2O_2 treatments, EtOH treatments would eventually require more severe conditions, in order to be more effective. In conclusion, the options that appeared to be more effective in terms of methane production, for each substrate, are moderate severity EtOH-, H_3Cit- and H_2O_2-treatments for WW, OP and JW, respectively, and a high severity EtOH-treatment for CGW. Energy calculations results showed high energy consumption for chemical pretreatment and suggested that the overall energy balance could be improved by using a heating system with a lower operating power, as well as a higher solid to liquid ratio in the pretreatment slurry.