TITLE: Comparison between ensilage and fungal pretreatment for storage of giant reed and subsequent methane production


1 Introduction

Renewable energy production from biomass has the potential to reduce our dependence on fossil fuels, and mitigate climate change due to greenhouse gas emissions (World Energy Council, 2013). Since the production of biomass is usually seasonal with a limited window for harvest, storage of biomass is crucial for maintaining a viable bioenergy supply chain. Dry storage is the most commonly used method for storing agricultural biomass, especially for low-moisture crops. In order to save costs, agricultural biomass is typically dried in the field without artificial drying; however, unpredictable weather conditions present serious challenges (Sultana and Kumar, 2011). Dry storage also has other drawbacks such as high dry matter losses during outdoor storage and risk of fire (Shinners et al., 2007). In contrast, wet storage with concurrent microbial pretreatment, such as ensilage and fungal pretreatment, have been proposed to reduce dry matter loss and/or reduce biomass recalcitrance for improved bioenergy production (Cui et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2015).

Ensilage, a traditional process for preserving green crops in the livestock industry, has been considered as an effective and reliable technology for biomass storage (Herrmann et al., 2011). Ensilage usually relies on naturally existing microorganisms, mainly lactic acid bacteria, to convert water soluble carbohydrates (WSC) in the biomass to organic acids, such as lactic acid, acetic acid, propionic acid, and butyric acid. The production of organic acids reduces pH values in the silage to below 4, which inhibits the growth of microorganisms and thus preserves biomass (Weiland, 2010). The dry matter loss can be as low as 1–5% after one year of ensilage (Herrmann et al., 2011), and the ensiled biomass was also found to be more digestible than that from dry storage (Cui et al., 2012). The improved degradability of biomass after ensilage might be associated with the conversion of non-structural carbohydrates to organic acids and ethanol (Oleskowicz-Popiel et al., 2011), as well as the degradation of hemicellulose and lignin that can reduce the recalcitrance of the biomass (Pakarinen et al., 2011; Yahaya et al., 2001). Ensilage was also found to increase the maximum daily methane production rate by 10%, and cumulative methane yield by 11%, compared to non-ensiled giant reed (Liu et al., 2015).

Fungal pretreatment reduces the recalcitrance of lignocellulosic biomass by degrading lignin with specific fungi, and has been considered an environmentally friendly pretreatment method as it is effective at ambient temperatures (Zheng et al., 2014). One of the drawbacks of fungal pretreatment is the long pretreatment time. However, this issue can be addressed by concurrently applying fungal pretreatment during wet storage (Wan and Li, 2011b). Ceriporiopsis subvermispora is one of the most effective fungal species that selectively degrade lignin over cellulose, although its selectivity has been found to vary with plant species and harvest time (Ge et al., 2014; Vasco-Correa and Li, 2015; Wan and Li, 2011b).

Both ensilage and fungal pretreatment have been studied for biomass preservation and pretreatment, however, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, there have been no published studies that compared these two storage methods for bioenergy production from the same biomass feedstocks. Giant reed (Arundo Donax L.) is a perennial rhizomatous grass which exhibits several traits ideal for a bioenergy feedstock, including rapid growth, high productivity, minimal inputs for cultivation, and resistance to biotic and abiotic stresses (Ge et al., 2015). Anaerobic digestion (AD) has been studied for the conversion of giant reed to methane, due to its simple process, reliable performance, and low greenhouse gas emissions (Ge et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2015; Yang and Li, 2014). Most recently, ensilage has been found to be effective in preserving giant reed with low dry matter loss (about 1%) and improving the methane yield during subsequent methane production via AD (Liu et al., 2015). However, fungal pretreatment of giant reed by C. subvermispora has not been reported (Ge et al., 2015). Thus, it is still unknown whether or not fungal pretreatment is more effective than ensilage for storage and AD of giant reed.

The objective of this study was to conduct a side-by-side comparison of ensilage and fungal pretreatment of giant reed. Since giant reed has a long harvest window, and the harvest time may also affect the storage and AD process (Di Nasso et al., 2011; Wahid et al., 2015), giant reed harvested at different times was used in this study. Effects of ensilage and fungal pretreatment on giant reed degradation and organic compound production, sugar yield via enzymatic hydrolysis, and methanol production by AD were evaluated and compared. This study not only fills a knowledge gap for the performance of storage and pretreatment of giant reed harvested at different times, but also provides useful information for the management of this promising energy crop.


2 Methods


2.1 Giant reed

Giant reed was harvested from the Ohio State University research farm in Columbus, OH, USA, in 2014 on August 26, October 3, November 6, and December 10, respectively. The giant reed feedstock was ground to pass through a 12 mm sieve using a shredder-chipper (Mighty Mac, Mackissic Inc., Parker Ford, PA, USA), and subjected to ensilage or fungal pretreatment on the same day. Characteristics of the giant reed are presented in Table 1 .


2.2 Ensilage of giant reed

Giant reed, except that harvested in early fall, was supplemented with water to reach a total solids (TS) content of around 40%, and packed into 1-gallon-size zipper bags (Ziploc Vacuum Freezer System, SC Johnson Inc., Racine, WI, USA) with 1 kg of wet giant reed in each bag. The bags were vacuumed to minimize the presence of oxygen and placed at room temperature (25 ± 3 °C). Ensilage was conducted in triplicate for giant reed harvested on each of the four dates. After 60 days of ensilage, all silage samples from the three replicates of each harvest date were taken out and mixed thoroughly. After sampling for compositional analysis, the remaining silage samples were stored at −20 °C for AD and enzymatic hydrolysis tests.


2.3 Fungal pretreatment

The fungus species C. subvermispora (ATCC 96608) was purchased from American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA). The inoculum used for fungal pretreatment was prepared by activating the fungus on 2% malt extract agar plates at 28 °C for 7 days. Then the liquid inoculum was prepared by inoculating 10 pieces (around 1 cm in diameter per piece) of the agar medium that contained fungus mycelium into 50 mL of 2% malt extract liquid medium in a 500-mL Erlenmeyer flask (4 flasks in total). The flasks were then sealed with cotton plugs, and statically cultivated at 28 °C for 7 days. Mycelia floating on the surface of the liquid cultures were transferred to a sterilized beaker, washed twice with 100 mL of sterilized deionized (DI) water, suspended in 200 mL of sterilized DI water, and then homogenized aseptically with a blender.

Twelve 1-L bottles were loaded with giant reed (three bottles for each harvesting date and about 150 g in each bottle), and autoclaved at 121 °C for 30 min. After cooling to room temperature, the bottles were inoculated with the homogenized liquid mycelia (16 mL each), and supplemented with sterilized DI water to obtain a final moisture content of around 70% (w/w, wet basis). Each bottle was plugged with a cotton stopper, which allowed air to diffuse into the bottle but prevented microbes and dust from entering, and incubated at 28 ± 1 °C for 30 days without stirring. After fungal pretreatment, the weight of each reactor was recorded and then the mixture was thoroughly mixed and sampled to determine TS content. The remaining mixture was dried at 40 °C for about 2 days to reach a moisture content of lower than 10% (w/w) and stored at room temperature prior to compositional analysis. Samples of pretreated giant reed were taken and stored at −20 °C for AD and enzymatic hydrolysis tests.

The ensiled giant reed contained large amounts of volatile compounds including organic acids and alcohol, which were not included during the measurement of TS at 105 °C based on the standard method. However, these volatile compounds affected the measurements and calculation of volatile solids (VS), TS loss, and methane yield. A correction of TS is recommended in biogas research when silage is used as a feedstock, and the VS should be calculated based on the corrected TS (Kreuger et al., 2011; Pakarinen et al., 2011). The volatilization coefficients for silage dried at 100 °C were proposed by Kreuger et al. (Kreuger et al., 2011) based on the portion of volatile compounds that were evaporated during drying: lactic acid = 0.375, total VFAs = 0.892, and ethanol = 1.000. Thus, the TS and VS used for calculating TS loss and biogas yields were corrected according to the following equation: FORMULA: Corrected TS ( or VS ) = TS ( or VS ) ( measured at 105 ° C ) + Ethanol content + 0.375 × lactic acid content + 0.892 × ( Acetic acid content + Propionic acid content + Butyric acid content )


2.4 Enzymatic hydrolysis

Enzymatic hydrolysis of ensiled giant reed using cellulase (Cellic CTec 2, Novozymes, Denmark) was conducted in triplicate according to a Laboratory Analytical Procedure reported by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) (Selig et al., 2008). Samples supplemented with cellulase (60 FPU per gram of cellulose) were incubated at 50 °C with shaking at 180 rpm for 72 h, and each hydrolysate was filtered through a 0.2 μm nylon membrane filter prior to sugar analysis. The glucose yield was calculated as follows: FORMULA: Glucose yield ( % ) = M glucose f × M cellulose × 100 where M _glucose is the amount of glucose released from cellulose by enzymatic hydrolysis (i.e., glucose present in the samples and the enzyme solution before enzymatic hydrolysis is subtracted), M _cellulose is the amount of cellulose in raw giant reed before ensilage or fungal pretreatment, and f = 1.1 is the conversion factor for cellulose to glucose (Zeng et al., 2007).


2.5 Anaerobic digestion (AD) of ensiled and fungal pretreated giant reed

Effluent from a mesophilic liquid anaerobic digester (KB BioEnergy, Akron, OH, USA) fed with sewage sludge was used as an inoculum for AD. Characteristics of the inoculum are presented in Table 1. AD trials were set up by mixing ensiled or fungal pretreated giant reed (feedstock) with AD effluent (inoculum) to obtain a feedstock-to-inoculum (F/I) ratio of 0.6 (based on VS), and DI water was added to adjust the TS content to 8%. About 800 g of the mixture was loaded into a 1-L bottle, and then each bottle was sealed by a rubber stopper with an outlet for biogas collection. A 5-L Tedlar gas bag (CEL Scientific, Santa Fe Springs, CA, USA) was connected to the outlet of each reactor for biogas collection. The bottle was incubated at 37 ± 1 °C for 30 days. AD with only inoculum added was run as a control. All AD tests were conducted in triplicate. Every 2–4 days, gas bags were collected to determine the biogas composition and volume. The gas bags were emptied when measuring the biogas volume, and reconnected to the outlet of reactors.


2.6 Analytical methods

TS, VS, total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN) and pH of samples were measured based on the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater (APHA, 2005). The carbon to nitrogen (C/N) ratio was calculated based on total carbon and total nitrogen contents, which were determined using an elemental analyzer (Elementar Vario Max CNS, Elementar Americas, Mt. Laurel, NJ, USA). Crude protein content was calculated by determining total organic nitrogen (TKN minus NH_3-N) and multiplying it by a factor of 6.25 (Hattingh et al., 1967). Cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin contents were analyzed based on an NREL Laboratory Analytical Procedure (Sluiter et al., 2008). Briefly, samples was extracted with DI water and ethanol in series using an automated extraction unit (Dionex Accelerated Solvent Extraction (ASE) 300, Thermo Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) and then the extractive content of each sample was determined. Extractive-free samples were hydrolyzed into monomers via a two-step acid hydrolysis, and the concentrations of mono-sugars after enzymatic hydrolysis (Section 2.4) and acid hydrolysis were measured by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Shimadzu LC-20AB, MD, USA) equipped with a Biorad Aminex HPX-87P column and a refractive index detector (RID). Temperatures of the column and detector were maintained at 60 °C and 55 °C, respectively, and HPLC grade water was used as the mobile phase with a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min. Acid-soluble lignin was measured by ultraviolet–visible (UV–vis) spectroscopy (BioMate 3S Spectrophotometer, Waltham, MA, USA). Acid-insoluble lignin was determined by gravimetric analysis.

In order to determine the contents of lactic acid, acetic acid, propionic acid, butyric acid, and ethanol in each sample, a 10 g sample was suspended in 100 mL of DI water and incubated at 4 °C for 10 h. The suspension was filtered through a 0.2 μm nylon membrane filter, and the filtrate was analyzed by an HPLC equipped with a Phenomenex Rezex RFQ-Fast Fruit H^+ column (Phenomenex Inc., Torrance, CA, USA), a micro- guard cartridge (Catalog No. 125-0129, 30 × 4.6 mm), a RID, and an ultra violet (UV) detector. Temperatures of the column and the detector were set at 60 °C and 55 °C, respectively, and 2.5 mM H_2SO_4 was used as the mobile phase with a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min. RID was used to determine concentrations of lactic acid, acetic acid, and propionic acid. Since butyric acid and ethanol are difficult to separate from each other, their concentrations were determined by measuring butyric acid by UV detector at 190 nm, and then subtracting the concentration of butyric acid from the combined RID peak area of butyric acid and ethanol. The peak area after subtraction was then used to calculate the ethanol concentration.

Biogas composition (CH_4, CO_2, N_2, and O_2) was analyzed by a gas chromatograph (Agilent, HP 6890, Wilmington, DE, USA) equipped with a 30 m × 0.53 mm × 10 μm Rt®-Alumina Bond/KCl deactivation column and a thermal conductivity detector. Helium gas was used as carrier gas at a flow rate of 5.2 mL/min. The column oven was initially set at 40 °C for 4 min and then increased to 60 °C with an increment of 20 °C/min and held at 60 °C for 5 min. The temperatures of the injector and detector were set at 150 °C and 200 °C, respectively. Biogas volume was determined by a drum-type gas meter (Ritter, Bochum, Germany).


2.7 Statistical analysis

Statistical significance was assessed by analysis of variance (ANOVA, α = 0.05) using Minitab (Version 16, Minitab, Inc., State College, PA, USA).


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Composition of giant reed

The compositions of giant reed harvested on different dates are shown in Table 1. The giant reed composition changed with harvest time. High TS content and WSC content are two important factors for the success of ensilage. The TS content increased more than 50% in giant reed harvested in December compared with that harvested in August because of the drying process in the field (Di Nasso et al., 2010). While increasing the biomass TS content is beneficial to reduce the energy costs for harvest and transportation, water addition might be needed for the ensilage process. The WSC content in giant reed was doubled with the delay of the harvest from August to December. High WSC content is desirable for ensilage, as it provides substrates for bacteria to produce lactic acid and other organic acids that reduce the silage pH, which improves preservation of the feedstock (Weiland, 2010).

Fungal pretreatment is affected by TS and other factors such as C/N ratio. The desired TS content for fungal pretreatment by C. subvermispora has been reported to be around 25% (Wan and Li, 2010), which is similar to that of ensilage (Weiland, 2010). Lignin content affects the recalcitrance of the biomass for microbial attack, and hemicellulose is the major carbon and energy source for the growth of C. subvermispora. Previous studies indicated that excessive extractives and nitrogen in the biomass feedstock may not be favorable for the growth of C. subvermispora (Vasco-Correa and Li, 2015). From August to December, the nitrogen content of giant reed gradually declined to about 50%, and the carbon-to-nitrogen (C/N) ratio doubled accordingly (Table 1), due to nutrient translocation to the below ground biomass (Di Nasso et al., 2011, 2013). The highest extractives content of 23.44% (by TS) was found in giant reed harvested in November. For other harvest dates, the extractives contents in giant reed were also above 19%, which is considered to be relatively high compared with other herbaceous feedstocks (Xu et al., 2014).


3.2 Effect of ensilage and fungal pretreatment on pH reduction and organic compounds production

As shown in Table 2 , the ensilage process effectively reduced the pH of giant reed silage to below 5, while fungal pretreatment obtained pH values of 5.2–5.4, which were comparable to the pH of untreated giant reed. Since giant reed was not sterilized before ensilage, low pH was crucial for preserving biomass feedstocks by inhibiting growth of microorganisms, such as enterobacteria, clostridia, and yeasts (Herrmann et al., 2011). The lower pH value in the ensiled giant reed was consistent with its higher levels of organic acids production. Lactic acid is the major contributor to the reduction of pH, due to its relatively strong acidity (pKa of 3.86), compared to other organic acids such as acetic acid, propionic acid, and butyric acid (Herrmann et al., 2011; Liu et al., 2015). In this study, giant reed harvested in November and December produced the highest amount of lactic acid of about 22 g/kg TS, which also resulted in the lowest silage pH of around 4. For giant reed harvested in August and October, although more than 30 g/kg TS of acetic acid or propionic acid were produced, the concentrations of lactic acid were low or not detectable, and the silage pH was only reduced to 4.56 and 4.77, respectively.

For ensiled giant reed harvested at different times, at least one type of organic acid (lactic acid, acetic acid, or propionic acid) reached a concentration higher than 20 g/kg TS. For giant reed harvested from August to December, the dominant type of acid gradually changed from acetic acid to propionic acid, and then lactic acid. In a successful ensilage process, lactic acid bacteria (LAB) should dominate the fermentation. However, when pH is above 4.0, lactic acid can be degraded to other compounds such as acetic acid, ethanol, CO_2, and H_2 (Driehuis et al., 1999). Propionic acid can also be produced in silage through two mechanisms. One is propionic acid production by propionic acid bacteria, which is inhibited at a pH lower than 4.8 (Driehuis et al., 1999). The other is the degradation of lactic acid to propionic acid by hetero-fermentative bacteria, such as Lactobacillus buchneri at a pH of about 4.0 (Driehuis et al., 1999; Elferink et al., 2001). Further analysis of the microbial community is needed to identify which pathway is dominant in this process. High concentrations of butyric acid often indicate silage spoilage (Yang et al., 2006). In this study, only giant reed harvested in August had some butyric acid accumulation, which might have been due to its low WSC content (Table 1).

Compared with ensilage, fungal pretreatment is an aerobic process that produced less amounts of organic acids, including a small amount of lactic acid (0.20–0.89 g/kg TS) and a relatively high concentration of butyric acid (3.19–7.04 g/kg TS) (Table 2). Acetic acid, propionic acid, and ethanol were not detectable. The organic acids led to a slight pH drop to about 5.2–5.4, which is not low enough to inhibit microbial growth. As a result, sterilization of feedstocks is a routine step prior to fungal pretreatment to reduce the biomass feedstock degradation by undesired microbes. The predominance of the selected fungi species over other contaminants is critical for the success of the fungal pretreatment. Zhao et al. (2014) reported that pre-colonized feedstocks can be used as an inoculum for fungal pretreatment of unsterilized yard trimmings. This technology can potentially be used for fungal pretreatment of unsterilized giant reed to reduce the energy cost for sterilization.


3.3 Effect of ensilage and fungal pretreatment on degradation of giant reed

During the ensilage process, giant reed harvested from October to December obtained lower (p < 0.05) losses of TS (0.6–1.1%), cellulose (2.8–3.6%), hemicellulose (4.3–8.5%), and lignin (5.0–5.6%) than giant reed harvested in August (Fig. 1 ), which was consistent with the higher acid concentrations and lower pH values that improved ensilage performance (Table 2). Fungal pretreatment resulted in higher TS losses (7.32–10.53%) than ensilage, especially for giant reed harvested after August (Fig. 1a). The cellulose losses (8.30–11.86%) were also about double of those from ensilage (2.69–7.27%) (Fig. 1c). However, the degradation of hemicellulose during fungal pretreatment was lower or comparable with that of ensilage (Fig. 1d). WSC was the most easily degradable component in giant reed for both processes, with up to 95% of the WSC degraded during ensilage and up to 72% degraded during fungal pretreatment (Fig. 1e). Extractives were also an easily degradable component in giant reed, with around 17.0–32.4% of extractives degraded during ensilage, and 19.7–34.1% degraded during fungal pretreatment (Fig. 1f).

Fungal pretreatment is expected to have higher loss of TS and carbohydrates than ensilage because it is an aerobic process and most of the intermediate products are completely degraded to CO_2. The fungal growth also consumes lignin, hemicellulose, WSC, and other carbohydrates. Lignin degradation is an important indicator for the success of fungal pretreatment. In this study, fungal pretreatment failed for giant reed harvested in August and October, with almost no or minimal lignin degradation, but was effective for giant reed harvested in November and December with lignin degradations of up to 7.9% (Fig. 1b). Similar results were reported by Vasco-Correa and Li (2015) who observed minimal lignin degradation in Miscanthus harvested in the fall, but more than 25% degradation in that harvested in the spring. Two possible reasons have been suggested for this observation, one is the higher nitrogen content of giant reed in the fall, which has been shown to influence the enzymatic activity of ligninolytic enzymes (Tekere et al., 2001); the other is the presence of antifungal compounds in the extractives, because hot water extraction was found to enable the growth of C. subvermispora on soybean stalks (Wan and Li, 2011a). Further investigations are needed to determine the reason for the failure of the fungal pretreatment on early harvested giant reed.


3.4 Effect of ensilage and fungal pretreatment on glucose yield of giant reed

The glucose yield of untreated giant reed decreased about 14% when the harvest date was delayed from August to December (Fig. 2 ), which may be attributed to the increased biomass recalcitrance as indicated by the higher lignin content (Table 1). Ensilage substantially increased glucose yield by 7.6%, 12.9%, 18.3%, and 20.3% for giant reed harvested in August, October, November and December, respectively (Fig. 2). The increased glucose yield during ensilage should be attributed to the lignin and hemicellulose degradation in giant reed, despite more than 8% cellulose loss during storage (Fig. 1b and c). Improved sugar yield by ensilage has also been reported in previous studies but with different feedstocks (Oleskowicz-Popiel et al., 2011; Zheng et al., 2011).

Different from ensilage, fungal pretreatment decreased glucose yields of giant reed harvested in August and October by 21% (p < 0.05) and 4% (p > 0.05), respectively. The reduced glucose yield of giant reed harvested in August and October indicated the failure of the fungal pretreatment, which was consistent with their low lignin degradation as well as the high cellulose loss for giant reed harvested in August (Fig. 1b and c). Fungal pretreatment increased the glucose yields of giant reed harvested in November and December by 20% and 22%, respectively, which was also consistent with their significant lignin degradation (p < 0.05) (Fig. 1b).

As shown in Fig. 2, ensilage was more effective than fungal pretreatment in improving glucose yield from giant reed harvested in August and October. However, fungal pretreatment resulted in comparable (p > 0.05) or significantly higher (p < 0.05) glucose yields than ensilage for giant reed harvested in November and December, respectively. Fungal pretreatment may be more suitable than ensilage for glucose-based bioenergy production, such as ethanol fermentation, from giant reed harvested in December. However, high glucose yield is not necessarily associated with high methane yield by AD, as AD also utilizes other organic compounds such as organic acids and hemicellulose. As a result, the effect of ensilage and fungal pretreatment on methane production by AD was further evaluated as described in the next section.


3.5 Comparison of methane production from ensiled and fungal pretreated giant reed

As shown in Fig. 3 , during AD of untreated, ensiled and fungal pretreated giant reed, the daily methane yield peaked on day 2–5, and most of the methane was produced within 15 days. Methane contents of biogas from ensiled giant reed and fungal pretreated giant reed increased quickly to 61–62% and 63–66% in 4 days during AD, while untreated giant reed produced more CO_2 at the initial stage of AD and its methane content reached 60–61% in 8 days (data not shown).

Ensiled giant reed had higher daily methane yields compared to those of untreated giant reed. Peak daily methane yields of ensiled giant reed harvested in August, October, November and December were 31.5%, 43.5%, 44.3%, and 10.6% higher than those of untreated giant reed, respectively (Fig. 3). The increased peak values might be related to the large amounts of organic acids and ethanol produced during ensilage, since these organic compounds are easily digestible substrates for AD, and accounted for 4–8% of the TS in ensiled giant reed (Table 2). This result was also consistent with a previous study that showed a good correlation between methane yield and the concentration of acetic acid and the total amount of acetic acid, lactic acid, and ethanol (Liu et al., 2015). Besides, the recalcitrance of giant reed was reduced by ensilage (Fig. 2), which could also have contributed to the increased peak values. In contrast to ensilage, fungal pretreatment negatively affected methane production from giant reed, resulting in 26.5–39.4% lower peak daily methane yields than the untreated giant reed harvested at different times (Fig. 3), probably due to its failure to reduce the biomass recalcitrance and/or loss of some easily degradable hydrocarbons during fungal growth (Vasco-Correa and Li, 2015).

The 30-day cumulative methane yields during AD of untreated giant reed decreased gradually from 165 L/kg VS to 141 L/kg VS when the harvest was delayed from August to December, although no significant (p > 0.05) difference was found between that harvested in August, October, and November (Fig. 4 ). Compared to untreated giant reed, ensilage resulted in a 13.7% and 10.2% increase (p < 0.05) in cumulative methane yields for giant reed harvested in August and December, respectively, and a slightly increased (about 5%) cumulative methane yield for giant reed harvested in October and November (Fig. 4). Fungal pretreated giant reed obtained 33.1%, 25.8%, 21.6%, and 7.6% lower cumulative methane yields than untreated giant reed harvested in August, October, November, and December, respectively (Fig. 4).

During ensilage and fungal pretreatment, some AD substrates such as cellulose, hemicellulose, WSC, and extractives were degraded, which negatively affected the methane yield. However, organic acids and/or ethanol were also produced especially during the ensilage process, which positively affected the methane yield. Besides, degradation of lignin and hemicellulose also had positive effects on methane production due to reduced biomass recalcitrance. As a result, the overall effect of ensilage and fungal pretreatment on the subsequent methane yield by AD was a trade-off between negative and positive effects.

As shown in Fig. 1, fungal pretreatment resulted in 5–7% reduction of hemicellulose, 25–30% reduction of extractives, and 60% reduction of WSC, in giant reed harvested in November and December (Fig. 1d–f). One previous study also reported decreased methane yield by fungal pretreatment with C. subvermispora, despite its effectiveness in improving sugar yields (Vasco-Correa and Li, 2015). Thus, the reduction of hydrocarbons during fungal pretreatment can offset the positive effects of reduced biomass recalcitrance, resulting in decreased cumulative methane yields during AD (Fig. 4). Although the ensilage process was shown to cause higher reduction of extractives and WSC than fungal pretreatment (Fig. 1e and f), these components were not totally lost but were converted to organic acids and ethanol that could be easily digested for methane production (Liu et al., 2015). However, the organic matter degraded during fungal pretreatment was mostly converted to CO_2, and thus could not contribute to the methane production. Therefore, ensiled giant reed can result in higher methane yields than untreated and fungal pretreated giant reed harvested at different times (Fig. 4).


4 Conclusion

Ensilage was better than fungal pretreatment for preserving giant reed harvested from August through December. Ensilage also reduced the recalcitrance of giant reed and improved its glucose and methane yields for all harvested times. In contrast, fungal pretreatment was only effective in improving glucose yields for giant reed harvested in November and December, and it resulted in reduced methane yields for giant reed harvested in August through December. Generally, ensilage was more suitable than fungal pretreatment for wet storage of giant reed for subsequent biogas production via AD.