TITLE: Accelerated biomethane production from lignocellulosic biomass: Pretreated by mixed enzymes secreted by Trichoderma viride and Aspergillus sp.


1 Introduction

Anaerobic digestion (AD) is conducive to the biogas conversion of organic waste. Biogas, methane as its main component, can be purified as bio-natural gas to achieve a complete replacement of natural gas when the methane content is up to 97%. Biogas has the advantage of “zero carbon emissions” in the “carbon cycle”, and can reduce the emission of greenhouse gases (GHGs). The annual maize straw (MS) output exceeds 360 million tons in China, which contains abundant potential energy (Zhao et al., 2018). The biogas potential of MS is 0.304 m^3/kg TS, and 9.3 × 10^8 m^3 of biogas can be produced per year if its total solid (TS) content is 85%, with reducing 5.51 × 10^8 kg of CO_2 and replacing 7.0 × 10^8 m^3 of natural gas (Cheng and Zhu, 2012). Straw-to-biogas can not only reduce the environmental pollutions caused by excessive straw, but also provide energy for energy-shortage areas. The remaining biogas residues and biogas slurry can also be used as farmland inputs, which is of great significance for promoting the sustainable development of circular agriculture.

However, due to its lignocellulosic properties, a large amount of MS has not been utilized, resulting in a waste of resources (Lizasoain et al., 2017). Microfibrils, hemicellulose, and lignin are the main ingredients of MS, forming a discontinuous layered and tight structure that is difficult to degrade and directly ferment under natural conditions (Pérez et al., 2002). Generally, cellulose and hemicellulose in lignocellulosic materials can be degraded by microorganisms and have enormous biogas potential, but lignin cannot be converted into biogas (Taherzadeh and Karimi, 2007). Therefore, pretreatment is essential to remove the combination of lignin and hemicellulose, increase the active contact area between cellulose and enzymes, and promote decomposition in AD. Pretreatment methods include physical methods, chemical methods, and biological methods. Straw utilization is an essential part of the circular agricultural process, and its pretreatment process requires safe pretreatment measures to prevent subsequent farmland pollution. Therefore, biological pretreatment technology has become an important technology for straw biogasification.

Previous studies have shown that enzymatic pretreatment of lignocellulosic materials can increase the digestibility of substrates and thus increase hydrolysis (the rate limiting step in biogas production) (Mussatto et al., 2008). The enzymatic hydrolysis process requires the synergy of cellulase and hemicellulase (Taherzadeh and Karimi, 2007; Khare et al., 2015; Gao et al., 2010;). It is reported that filamentous fungi have a high ability to produce enzymes, such as Aspergillus, Trichoderma, Chaetomium, Penicillium. The high cellulase activity and easy separation and purification make Trichoderma as the prevalent strain in enzyme production (Kawai et al., 2013). Trichoderma viride is a prolific producer of a variety of cellulolytic enzymes, including endoglucanases, cellobiohydrolases (exoglucanases), and β-glucosidases, which work in synergistically to elicit effective hydrolysis (Chaverri et al., 2003; Goldman et al., 1994). T. viride and its specific multi-enzyme system are of particular interest for lignocellulose pre-treatment applications. However, the activity of β-glucosidase in the enzymes of Trichoderma is weak. Aspergillus sp. are reported to be producers of xylanase and β-glucosidase (Faseleh jahromi et al., 2011). Besides, the composition of cellulases produced by a single fungus is fixed, which limits the effective hydrolysis. Therefore, mixed enzymes obtained from two or more fungi are expected to have a complementary effect on the hydrolysis of lignocellulosic biomass. Zhao et al. (2018) found that enzymes from fungus increased biogas production and the effect of mixed enzymes from different fungi was better than that of single-source enzymes. What’s more, enzymes extracted from fungi are more economical than commercial enzymes, and have similar efficacy with commercial enzymes. Hom-Diaz et al. (2016) studied the pretreatment effect on microalgal biomass grown in the urban wastewater treatment system between the enzyme extracted from the fungus Trametes versicolor and commercial laccase. They found that the methane yield pretreated by the former was 45% higher than that of the latter. In short, the development of low-cost and high-efficient enzyme pretreatment methods is a promising direction.

In this study, enzymes were obtained by solid-state fermentation of fungi, and crude enzymes of different biological sources were mixed in different proportions (The mixing rates of ETv/EAs were 5/0, 4/1, 3/2, 2/3, 1/4, 0/5) as pretreatment agents for lignocellulose raw materials. The performance of enzymatic pretreatment on anaerobic digestion of straw was assessed. The mechanism of enzymatic pretreatment in straw biogas conversion was explored by analyzing VFA, alkalinity, methane yield, and methane content. High-throughput sequencing technology was used for 16s rRNA sequencing to evaluate the effect of enzymatic pretreatment on the microbial community structures. This study will further provide the basis and technology for the industrialization of straw energy conversion.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Cultivation of  T. viride  and  Aspergillus  sp.

T. viride (MH427089) and Aspergillus sp. (KY644131) used in the experiment were screened by Biomass Engineering Center in China Agricultural University, Beijing, China. MS powder medium was used to amplify fungi (MS powder 10 g, (NH_4)_2SO_4 4 g, KH_2PO_4 2 g, MgSO_4·7H_2O 0.5 g, peptone 1 g, agar 20 g, deionized water 1000 mL, pH Value 6.5). After culturing at 30 °C for 3 days, the spore suspension was used as an inoculum to prepare a crude enzyme solution. The viable spore concentration in the suspension was adjusted to 2 × 10^9 CFU/mL by Colony-Forming Units (CFU) count evaluation.


2.2 Preparation of crude enzyme solution

The enzyme-producing medium was MS powder-wheat bran medium (MS powder: wheat bran: nutrient solution = 2:1:6, where the nutrient solution was (NH_4)_2SO_4 2 g/L, MgSO_4 5 g/L, KH_2PO_4 8 g/L, natural pH). The medium used MS and wheat bran and other agricultural waste as the main component of the enzyme-producing medium. After inoculated, it cultured at 25 °C for 3 d. The sterilized deionized water was added in proportion with a solid–liquid ratio of 1:12, and leached on a 180 r/min shaker for 1 h, and centrifuged to obtain a crude enzyme solution. The crude enzyme solution could hydrolyze cellulose and hemicellulose, and its enzyme activity was shown in Table 1 .


2.3 Raw materials and inoculum

The green MS used in the enzyme-producing medium and the dry yellow MS used in AD were taken from the Shangzhuang Experimental Station of China Agricultural University (Haidian District, Beijing). MS was chopped to small pieces of 5 ~ 8 cm by a manual chopper, dried in an oven at 105 °C for 20 min, and then dried at 80 °C until the moisture was below 10%. Finally, it was ground with a FZ-102 Mini Plant Grinder to obtain MS powder (Particle size less than 2 mm). The inoculated sludge was taken from a continuously operating biogas plant using MS and pig manure as raw materials at the Zhuozhou Experimental Station of China Agricultural University, Beijing, China. To keep the microorganisms in “starved status”, the inoculum was stored for more than two weeks before use (Cai et al., 2019). The basic properties of raw materials and anaerobic inoculum were shown in Table 2 .


2.4 Test design


2.4.1 Pretreatment

The different mixing ratios of ETv/EAs were set to the following treatments, namely 5/0, 4/1, 3/2, 2/3, 1/4, 0/5, and no enzyme as a control. 50 mL enzyme solution was separately added to a 1 L reagent bottle containing 9 g of dry yellow MS powder, pretreated in a 50 °C incubator for 6 days, and the control group was replaced with 50 mL of deionized water.


2.4.2 Anaerobic digestion

MS was pretreated for 6 days, taken out from the incubator. 300 mL of anaerobic inoculum was added, and deionized water was added to make up the fermentation volume of 400 mL. The fermentation unit was filled with nitrogen to produce an anaerobic environment. And the blank group was set as reactors in which only anaerobic inoculum and deionized water were added. All treatments were carried out in triplicate at (35 ± 2) °C. Based on the pervious study, more than 85% of biogas and methane yield could be obtained within the first 25 days (Zhang et al., 2014; Cai et al., 2018). Therefore, the digestion period in this experiment was set to 25 days.


2.5 Index determination

The biogas production and methane content were measured per day, and the pH value, alkalinity, volatile fatty acids (VFA), soluble chemical oxygen demand (sCOD), and other indicators of the reaction system were periodically sampled from anaerobic conditions. The microbial diversity structure was determined by fermentation for 24 h to detect the effect of enzymes as an exogenous additive on the microbial communities in the anaerobic fermentation system.


2.5.1 Chemical indicators analysis

Total solids (TS), volatile solids (VS), dry matter (DM), total carbon (TC), and total nitrogen (TN) (measured by MS and anaerobic inoculum) were measured using the standard method of the American Public Health Association (APHA, 2005). Cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin were measured using an Ankom 2000 fiber analyzer (Ankom Technology Corp., Fairport, NY, USA) (Guo et al., 2011). The samples were centrifuged at 12,000 r/min, and the pH value was measured using a B-212 type micro pH meter (Horiba, Japan). The CMCase, xylanase, β-glucosidase, and filter paper enzyme activity in the crude enzymes were determined by the DNS method (Hua et al., 2016). VFA was measured using a Shimadzu LC-20A high performance liquid chromatograph (Zhao et al., 2018). The sCOD was determined using a COD rapid detector (Lovibond E799718, Germany) (Chandra et al., 2012). The alkalinity was determined by the titration method. Daily methane yield, cumulative methane yield, and kinetic analysis of methane production were determined according to the methods described by Zhao et al. (2017a). All solvents and reagents were bought from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd, and belong to the analytical reagent. Water used in all the steps of the experiment was deionized water.


2.5.2 Microbial diversity analysis

To detect the impact of enzymes as an exogenous additive on microorganisms in the anaerobic fermentation system, samples of anaerobic fermentation for 24 h were used to determine the changes of bacteria and archaea. Microbial DNA was extracted using the E.Z.N.A.® soil DNA Kit (Omega Bio-Tek, Norcross, GA, U.S.) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. High-throughput sequencing was performed by Majorbio Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). The V3-V4 region of the bacteria 16S ribosomal RNA gene was amplified by PCR using bacterial universal primers 338F (5′-ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG-3′) and 806R (5′-GGACTACHVGGGTWTCTAAT-3′) and archaeal universal primers 524F (5′-TGYCAGCCGCCGCGGTAA-3′) and 958R (5′-YCCGGCGTTGAVTCCAATT-3′) (Cai et al., 2019). PCR reactions were performed in triplicate 20 μL mixture containing 4 μL of 5 × FastPfu Buffer, 2 μL of 2.5 mM dNTPs, 0.8 μL of each primer (5 μM), 0.4 μL of FastPfu Polymerase, and 10 ng of template DNA. The amplicon library was sequenced using the Illumina Miseq platform. Operational Units (OTUs) were clustered with 97% similarity cutoff using UPARSE (version 7.1 http://drive5.com/uparse/), and chimeric sequences were identified and removed using UCHIME. The taxonomy of each 16S rRNA gene sequence was analyzed by RDP Classifier (http://rdp.cme.msu.edu/) against the silva (SSU115)16S rRNA database using a confidence threshold of 70% (Amato et al., 2013). The microbial population and genus levels were analyzed for microbial structure by www.i-sanger.com, provided by Majorbio Ltd. (Shanghai, China).


2.6 Data analysis and statistics

All reported values were the actual values of the treatment group minus the actual values of the blank group and were the average of triplicate results. Data processing and statistical analysis were performed using Microsoft Excel 2010 (Microsoft Co., Redmond, WA, USA), SPSS 20 (IBM Co., Armonk, NY, USA), Canoco for Windows 5.1 (Biometris Plant Research International, Wageningen, The Netherlands) and Origin 9.1 (OriginLab Corporation, Northampton, MA 01060, USA). Statistics analysis of sample data was performed using Duncan’s multi-range test for variance analysis. Significance was defined as 95% confidence in differences (i.e., p < 0.05).


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Enzyme activity of crude enzyme solution

To evaluate the ability to hydrolyze cellulose and hemicellulose, the enzyme activity of crude enzyme solutions secreted by Trichoderma viride and Aspergillus sp. were analyzed and shown in Table 1. The CMCase activity reflects the ability of the enzyme to cut cellulose chains into cello-oligosaccharides, that is, the function of endoglucanase. Xylanases are enzymes that cut hemicellulose chains into xylo-oligosaccharide and xylose. The β-glucosidase mainly hydrolyzes cellobiose and soluble cello-oligosaccharides to glucose. The filter paper enzyme activity is the result of the synergistic action of endoglucanase, exoglucanase, and glucosidase, which represents the total ability to degrading cellulose. Among the tested enzyme activities, ETv had higher CMCase and filter paper enzyme activities, while EAs had higher xylanase and β-glucosidase activities. With respect to enzyme diversity and efficiency, the mixture of ETv and EAs will be a better enzyme solution for hydrolyzing cellulose and hemicellulose in MS compared to any single enzyme solution.


3.2 VFA, alkalinity, alkalinity/VFA ratio, and pH value during AD

At the beginning of fermentation (day 0), anaerobic digestion of MS with enzymatic pretreatment significantly improved (p < 0.05) the VFA concentration in all biochemical methane potential (BMP) trials (Fig. 1 ). The initial VFAs is produced by the decomposition of monosaccharide by bacteria attached to the substrate. The 3/2 mixing ratio of the ETv/EAs group had obvious advantages over the others, which meant that the production of monosaccharide in 3/2 group was higher than others. At 0 d, the total VFA concentration reached 3.97 g/L, which was higher than those of the 4/1 (54.19%), 0/5 (98.60%), 5/0 (112.63%), 1/4 (211.29%), and 2/3 (292.49%) groups. In the VFA composition, the concentration of acetic acid, butyric acid, and lactic acid in the 3/2 group was 1.38 g/L, 1.07 g/L, and 0.98 g/L, respectively. The high concentration of acetic acid and butyric acid provided advantageous conditions for AD. On the 1st day, formic acid and acetic acid, which can be easily used by methanogens, were exhausted, only leaving a small part of butyric acid and lactic acid. The acetic acid concentration in the 4/1 group accounted for 47.75% of the total VFA at 0 d, becoming the main component of VFA. With the decrease in the proportion of ETv, the concentration of acetic acid decreased, which may promote the production of acetic acid after pretreatment by ETv. When the ratio of ETv/EAs decreased to 2/3 and 1/4, the VFA concentration decreased, and reduced the VFA composition, indicating that the high proportion of EAs was not conducive to the pretreatment of MS. At 0 d, the concentration of acetic acid in the 5/0 and 0/5 groups increased 130.30% and 238.64%, respectively, compared with the control, and the butyric acid concentration increased by 294.59% and 254.95%, respectively. Acetic acid and butyric acid are small organic acids that can be easily utilized in AD. Butyric acid can be broken down into two molecules of acetic acid, which can be used directly by methanogens (Table 3 ).

The increase in VFA concentration provided superior initial conditions for AD of MS. After fermentation for 1 d, the VFA concentration of each treatment group changed significantly. Lactic acid can be converted to acetic acid and H_2 by hydrogen-producing acetogen, while its utilization lags behind formic acid and acetic acid. Formic acid, acetic acid, propionic acid, and butyric acid in the 0/5 group was massively consumed, only 0.12 g/L left in total VFA. It was indicated that the easily exploitable organic acids were consumed by methanogens and converted into methane in the AD stage, which could increase the methane yield. In the enzymatic treatment groups, acetic acid and butyric acid were consumed, but propionic acid accumulated, predicting that propionic type fermentation may be carried out in the acidification stage (Kong et al., 2018). From day 2, the concentrations of both butyric and acetic acid sharply decreased, but the propionic acid concentration increased and maintained a high level from days 3 to 25, which was in accordance with the results of studies conducted by Kong et al. (2018). During methane fermentation, the rate at which butyric acid was converted to acetic acid was faster than that at which propionic acid was converted to acetic acid due to the different Gibbs free energy of the conversion (Table 3). In general, the tolerance concentration of methanogens to propionic acid is 1 ~ 2 g/L. Excessive accumulation of propionic acid will cause certain acid inhibition of the AD system. After 1 d of fermentation, the concentration of VFA in each treatment group remained stable, and propionic acid was the primary constituent acid of VFA. With the progress of acid production and microbial metabolism, after the 3rd day, VFA was mainly composed of propionic acid. On the 20th day, the control group had a propionic acid content of 2.42 g/L, and acid inhibition had occurred.

The alkalinity buffers the reaction system. Studies have shown that when the total alkalinity is between 3.00 and 8.50 g/L and the ratio of alkalinity/VFA is more than 2:1, the biogas fermentation will be in a stable state (Lian et al., 1984). In the early fermentation stage (from day 0 to day 5), microorganisms need to adapt to the new environment and establish a dynamic and stable community structure. Alkalinity was increasing and the system was gradually stable. During the fermentation process, the alkalinity value of each group was stable in the range of 3.24 to 5.21 g/L. After 1 d of fermentation, the alkalinity/VFA ratio of 4/1 and 0/5 groups increased sharply to 18.71 and 9.33 in the 1st day treatment, respectively, and then decreased rapidly to 3.17 and 2.40, respectively. The alkalinity/VFA of the 2/3 and 1/4 groups was stable between 2.14 and 5.76, and the fermentation of the two groups was stable. The alkalinity/VFA of the 4/1, 3/2, and 0/5 groups at day 0 was lower than 2:1, indicating that the reaction system required a certain adaptation period.

The decrease or increase of VFA inevitably caused a change in the alkalinity value, and the interaction between the two will maintain the stability of the pH value. The dynamic balance of alkalinity and VFA concentration maintained a permanent pH value between 7.3 ~ 7.9. At the initial fermentation stage, the system was in the acidification stage, and the pH gradually decreased in days 1 ~ 3. The complex organic macromolecules were decomposed into small organic acids, alcohol, CO_2, H_2, etc. by hydrolysis and acidification bacteria, providing necessary nutrients for the subsequent acetate and methane production phases. Subsequently, on the 5th day of fermentation, the pH value increased, indicating that the acidic small molecule substance was consumed, and the concentration of the buffering alkaline substance was increased.


3.3 Methane content and CO 2  content during AD

Besides the enhancement of methane yields, the biological addition of enzymes increased the initial methane production rate in all AD trials (Fig. 2 ). After 1 d of fermentation, the methane content of treatment groups was higher than 50%, indicating that the methane fermentation started quickly in these groups. The methane content of 5/0 and 0/5 groups was significantly higher than that in control at the 1st d, 26.97% and 13.29% higher, respectively. The methane content of the pretreatment groups was higher than that of control during 0 ~ 5 days, indicating that enzymatic pretreatment can increase initial methane content in the AD of MS. A similar outcome was also mentioned by Nkemka et al. during anaerobic digestion of corn silage and cattail (Nkemka et al., 2015). Methane content in the 2/3 group was always higher than 60% at days 2 ~ 4, predicting that the methanogenesis was active in methane metabolism, and having high utilization of nutrients. Methane content of 4/1, 3/2, and 1/4 group also reached the maximum at day 3, which were 62.74%, 62.57%, and 60.85%, respectively. However, methane content of the control group was only 56.91% on day 3, then decreased to 50.30% at day 4, having poor methane production ability, indicating that the enzymatic pretreatment accelerated the start-up time of methane fermentation. Methane content during days 10 ~ 20 showed the same trend, which was between 53.66% and 60.37%, having a stable AD process. In other words, enzymes contributed to shortening the microbial lag-phase of anaerobic biodegradation, which can be worth noting to reduce the retention time of biogas reactors.

The median value of CO_2 content in the enzymatic pretreatment groups was lower than that of the control group, and the content distribution was concentrated. The average value was higher than that of the control group, indicating that the methane fermentation process was more stable after enzymatic pretreatment.


3.4 Methane yield

According to BMP results, enzymes with different proportions boosted the methane yield by 6.08–31.74% in all examined trials in this particular study. Daily methane yield of enzymatic treatment groups was significantly higher than that of the control group on day 1, because the pretreatment process promoted the hydrolysis of MS. At the beginning of AD, the VFA concentration increased, and nutrients that can be directly used by microorganisms also increased, so the activities of methane metabolism were more active than control. The daily methane yield of 2/3 group was the largest (62.11 mL/g TS_added) at day 1, which was 42.39%, 24.12%, 47.63%, 46.87%, 51.30%, and 57.00% higher than 5/0, 4/1, 3/2, 1/4, 0/5 group, and the control, respectively (Fig. 3 ). At day 2, the daily methane yield of treatment groups decreased to 24.13 ~ 28.51 mL/g TS_added, then rose to 44.10 ~ 47.45 mL/g TS_added at day 3.

The cumulative methane yield in the control group was always lower than that in the enzyme-treated groups (Fig. 3), which indicated that the enzymatic pretreatment produced effective MS hydrolysis, and that the hydrolysate could be utilized by the microorganisms in the fermentation system to be converted to methane. The 5/0 group was slightly better than 0/5 group during days 0 ~ 12, but cumulative methane yield was 419.63 and 417.81 mL/g TS_added at day 25, respectively, which was no significant difference. Cumulative methane yield in the 2/3 group reached 512.64 mL/g TS_added, 31.74% higher than that in the control group. In the current study, the medium containing maize straw powder and wheat bran was used to produce complex enzymes, which reduced the production cost of enzymes. The result was better than only using a single enzyme to pretreat maize straw from Schroyen et al., who used laccase to pretreatment and obtained a 17% increase of methane production (Schroyen et al., 2014). It can be seen that enzymatic treatment had enhanced methane production ability, and mixed enzymes were better than single enzymes. Compared to pretreatment by the microorganism, mixed enzymes also have an obvious advantage in the actual effect. Because microorganisms consumed large amounts of soluble organic matter, which limited the applied effect (Yuan et al., 2014; Zhao et al., 2018).


3.5 Kinetic analysis of methane production

Modified Gompertz model describes the relationship between cumulative methane yield and time (Zwietering et al., 1990), including the lag period, the maximum methane production rate, and methane-producing potential (Lay et al., 1998; Zwietering et al., 1990). The correlation coefficient (R^2) of each treatment was between 98.09% and 98.92% (Table 4 ). There was no significant difference between the predicted value and the actual value of methane yield, indicating that the Modified Gompertz model can reflect the methane production of MS during AD (Zhao et al., 2018).

The λ value reflects the reaction rate of the substrates in the AD system, which is indirectly reflected in the impact strength of the material on microorganisms. A low λ value indicates that microorganisms can adapt quickly to the new environment with no significant delay, so the fermentation system can rapidly generate methane. Conversely, a high λ value indicates that microorganisms need some time to adapt to the new environment and that methane production is delayed (Zhao et al., 2018). In this study, λ values of each treatment group were all less than 1 d, indicating that microorganisms could quickly adapt to the external environment, and methane could be rapidly produced on the first day under anaerobic conditions. Λ values of enzymatic pretreatment groups were smaller than that of the control group (-0.15 d), indicating that enzymatic pretreatment provided a more suitable environment for AD, which could be seen from the initial concentration of VFA in Fig. 1. Enzymatic pretreatment improved the initial VFA in the anaerobic system, and small molecule organic acids were the substrate for methanogens in AD. This favorable condition promoted the rapid response of methanogens to the environment. It can be seen from Fig. 3 that the daily methane yield of enzymatic treatment groups was significantly higher than that of the control group at the initial stage of AD. Enzymatic pretreatment created superior conditions for AD of MS and provided more nutrients for anaerobic microorganisms. The λ values of enzymatic treatment groups were all less than 0 d, reflecting that the appropriate pretreatment conditions played a decisive role in the efficient operation of AD.

The modified Gompertz model predicts the maximum methane production rate and reflects the methane production performance. The 2/3 group had the largest R_max (36.92 mL/g TS_added), which showed that methane production performance was optimal under the treatment conditions. The control group had the lowest R_max (23.36 mL/g TS_added), which may be related to the low initial VFA concentration. Because in the early stage of fermentation, methanogens can only use the existing small molecular acid in the environment to synthesize methane. As the fermentation process progresses, the decomposing bacteria play a decomposing function. When the macromolecular organic matter is decomposed into small molecules of acid, H_2, and CO_2, the methanogen will undergo subsequent growth and metabolism.


3.6 Effect of enzymatic pretreatment on the microbial community in AD

In agricultural production, Trichoderma sp. are often used as biological control agents to control crop diseases by inhibiting pathogenic microorganisms (Moya et al., 2020). Zhou found that Aspergillus niger have a certain inhibitory effect on marine bacteria (Zhou et al., 2014). Anaerobic digestion is a microbial process involving hydrolytic bacteria and methanogenic archaea. The mixed enzymes used in the study were extracted from Trichoderma viride and Aspergillus sp. by solid-state fermentation. Whether the extract contains substances that inhibit the growth of microorganisms is essential for AD. Therefore, 24-hour samples were obtained from the AD system and determined by Illumina Miseq high-throughput sequencing technology to evaluate the effect of the enzymes on the microbial system. The primers pair 338F/806R and 524F/958R were used to amplify the V3 ~ V4 regions of bacteria and archaea. The average high-quality sequence reads of bacteria and archaea were 36468 and 37157, and the sequencing coverage was 99.48% and 99.97%, respectively. These data were sufficient to ensure the accuracy of the rarefaction analysis, and all rarefaction curves reached a plateau. Table 5 showed alpha diversity indices of the bacteria and archaea, characterized by sobs, shannon, simpson, ace, and chao indices. Sobs, ace, and Chao describe the changes in the community richness after enzymatic pretreatment. Shannon and Simpson were used to reflect the diversity of the microbial communities in the AD system. Sobs value was the actual observation of microbial community richness, ie, the total number of microorganisms in the samples. The bacteria sobs value in the inoculated sludge was low, then increased after the addition of MS. Mixed enzymes improved the richness and diversity of bacterial communities, and provided a basis for enhancing the stability of the AD system.

The archaea’s sobs value was low (51 ~ 57), which was equivalent to the content of archaea in the sludge, which was much lower than that of bacteria. The possible reason was that methanogens had a longer generation time, and the samples were measured at 24 h fermentation. Methanogens did not have enough time to grow and multiply. Nevertheless, selecting this time to determine methanogens was more necessary to show the enzyme’s impact on the microorganisms in the fermentation system. If microorganisms could not be stably present in the reaction system, even if the action of the enzyme accelerated the cellulose decomposition, it also not resulted in high methane yield. The activity of the enzyme was recognized if it did not bring harmful substances to the fermenting microorganism. Compared with the sludge and control groups, the richness and diversity of the enzymatic pretreatment did not cause large oscillations, indicating that the use of enzymes did not inhibit the methanogens. It ensured that smaller molecular substances would be available by methanogens under the enhanced bacterial activity, which would increase the methane production capacity of MS.


3.6.1 Bacterial community

At the phylum level (Fig. 4a), Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, Synergistetes, Spirochaetae, Choloflexi were dominant in the AD system. The abundance of Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes was more than 60% of the total bacteria. Bacteroidetes were the main bacteria in the anaerobic fermentation process. Firmicutes were widely found in anaerobic reactors and rumen, which were significant microorganisms for acidification and hydrolysis. Both phyla have the function of releasing extracellular enzymes to enhance the decomposition and hydrolysis of lipids, proteins, cellulose, and hemicellulose (Kong et al., 2018). Bacteroidetes in the enzymatic treatment groups increased, that is, the abundance of Bacteroidetes in the 5/0, 1/4, and 0/5 group increased to 38.24%~40.30%, which was 18.06%~24.42% higher than that of the control group. The abundance of Firmicutes in the inoculated sludge was the most (47.10%), while decreased in the control and pretreatment groups. The Firmicutes abundance decreased the most in the 2/3 group, dropping to 24.42%. According to Table 4, methane yield of 2/3 group was 512.64 mL/g TS_added, 31.74% higher than the control group; interestingly, in these treatment groups, methane yield increased with the decrease of Firmicutes abundance. Firmicutes abundance affected methane production, and when the abundance of Firmicutes was low, methane yield increased. Meanwhile, the higher the total abundance of Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes, the lower the methane yield, such as the 3/2 group; conversely, the higher the methane yield, such as the 2/3 group. It can be seen that the bacterial community diversity had a more significant impact on methane production.

Proteobacteria, Spirochaetae, Synergistetes, Choloflexi, WS6, Actinobacteria, and Fibrobacteres accounted for lower abundance in anaerobic reactors, with a total proportion of 16.07%~31.48%. Such microorganisms were a relatively small part in the AD system, but also played an important role. Proteobacteria, Spirochaetae, and WS6 were common in anaerobic reactors, which played a role in the decomposition of organic macromolecules. But Proteobacteria and WS6 did not change much among the pretreatment groups and control group and inoculated sludge. Spirochaetae was found in the termites rumen, which can use a variety of carbohydrates, including cellulose and hemicellulose, and synthesize acetic acid with H_2 and CO_2 for methanogens (Leadbetter et al., 1999). This phylum of bacteria changed in different treatment groups, with the abundance increased to 12.16% in the 2/3 treatment group, indicating that the hydrolysis and acid production process was enhanced after the enzyme pretreatment with the 2/3 mixing ratio.

At the genus level (Fig. 4b), Clostridium, VadinHA17, Draconibacteriaceae, vadinBC27, and Ruminofilibacter were dominant. In the 2/3 group, with the highest methane yield, the abundances of Ruminofilibacter, Treponema 2, Treponema, and Bacteroidales_UCG-001 were higher than those of other treatment groups, with abundance values of 5.40%, 7.90%, 2.50%, and 2.06%, respectively. These four types of bacteria all had the ability to decompose cellulose, which may be the reason for the high methane yield in the 2/3 group. It also reflected that the pretreatment of MS with the 2/3 mixing ratio of ETv/EAs conducive to the use of cellulose by bacteria in AD.


3.6.2 Archaeal community

At the genus level (Fig. 5 ), the dominant archaea included methanogenic archaea and non-methanogenic bacteria. The methanogenic archaea contained five genera, Methanosaeta, Methanosarcina, Methanebacterium, Methanomassicicoccus, and Methanocorpusculum, with the total abundance accounts for 37.57%~67.57% in archaea. Methanosaeta was the dominant methanogen in the anaerobic system, accounting for 14.18%~44.59%, but the abundance among different treatment groups was significantly different. Methanosaeta, which are always found in a medium temperature environment, have an acetic acid metabolism and specifically produce methane from acetic acid (Großkopf et al., 1998). Followed by Methanosarcina, the abundance of Methanosarcina between the treatment groups did not change much and was in a stable state. The archaea are widely found in methane fermentation reactors. They are usually the dominant bacterium for methane production, which are acetic nutritional microorganisms, mainly found in systems with high concentrations of VFA (especially acetic acid), and their abundance was affected by the concentration of acetic acid (Zhao et al., 2017b). The abundance of Methanebacterium and Methanomassicicoccus in the pretreatment group was lower than that of sludge (both Methanebacterium and Methanomassicicoccus accounted for 19.29% of the total abundance). Methanebacterium can produce methane using H_2 and CO_2 (Krivushin et al., 2010). Methanomassiliicoccus had a unique metabolic property and was a methyl-type metabolism (Iino et al., 2013). However, unlike traditional obligate methyl-type methanogens, this type of archaea lacked the complete pathway of reducing CO_2 to methyl-CoM (Lang et al., 2014). So, these archaea required additional H_2 to grow. Genomic analysis revealed that Methanomassiliicoccus contains genes that reduce methanol, methylamine, dimethylamine, and other substrates by H_2. Therefore, Methanomassiliicoccus is neither an atypical methylotrophic methanogen nor an atypical hydrogen methanogen, but a mixed type of both (Lang et al., 2014; Brugère et al., 2014). Bathyarchaeota had a variety of metabolic modes, which can degrade macromolecules such as aromatic compounds, chitin, cellulose, and protein, and produce small molecular compounds such as acetic acid by fermentation. The energy was also obtained by autotrophic acetogenic pathways using CO_2 and H_2. Acetic acid produced by Bathyarchaeota is a major electronic carrier that can be utilized by methanogens and heterotrophic bacteria, and is a core driver of the deep carbon cycle and ecosystem (He et al., 2016). It speculated that Deep sea Euryarchaeotic Group-DSEG had a positive effect on cellulose decomposition. Therefore, in the anaerobic reactor with straw as a substrate, the large number of such archaea will facilitate the decomposition of cellulose into small molecules, providing substrates for methanogens (Zhao et al., 2018). Although the methanogen abundance in the pretreatment groups was lower than that of sludge, the number of archaea associated with cellulose degradation increased, which was beneficial in early AD.


3.7 Relationship between microorganisms and environmental factors

Redundancy analysis (RDA) was used to visually analyze the relationship between environmental factors and microorganisms (Fig. 6 ). The 4/1, 3/2, 0/5, and the control treatment groups were concentrated in the third quadrant, and there was no significant difference in methane content among 4/1, 3/2, and 0/5 group. The 2/3, 5/0, and 1/4 groups, which obtained higher methane yield, were more dispersed, farther to the main component axis. Methane yield was positively correlated with acetic acid, butyric acid, and sCOD, indicating that methane was mostly converted from acetic acid, butyric acid, and sCOD. Propionic acid formed the largest proportion of VFA and was highly correlated with VFA. According to Fig. 1, propionic acid was the main constituent acid in MS single digestion, while lactic acid, acetic acid, and butyric acid accounted for a small proportion in VFA. Alkalinity and VFA together maintained the acid-base balance in the AD system, in which acetic acid and butyric acid made a greater contribution in maintaining acid-base balance. The bacteria were mostly related to the degradation of cellulose or the conversion to small organic acids. Ruminofilibacter, Treponema, WS6, vadinHA17, Ruminococcaceae, Clostridium, VadinBC27, etc. were abundant in the AD system, and playing an important role in acid conversion. It is obvious that bacteria in the treatment groups with high methane yield, such as 2/3 and 1/4 group, was richer and more relevant. It can be seen that pretreatment conditions affected the microbial community structure, and then the microbes changed the fermentative methane production capacity by changing relevant indicators in the AD environment.


4 Conclusions

Enzymatic pretreatment changed the initial VFAs concentration and composition, and the conversion rate of MS to biomethane was higher after enzymatic pretreatment. The predominant VFA detected in all groups was propionic acid. Mixed enzymes performed better than single enzymes, and a 2/3 mixing ratio of ETv/EAs showed the optimal performance, achieving the largest cumulative methane yield (512.64 mL/g TS_added). Simultaneously, enzymatic pretreatment stimulated the abundance and diversity of bacterial and archaeal communities associated with cellulose degradation, providing more nutrients for methanogens. Bacteroides and Firmicutes were the dominant bacteria, and Methanosaeta was the dominant archaea in AD.


 CRediT authorship contribution statement

Xiaoling Zhao: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, Visualization. Zehui Zheng: Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing. Yafan Cai: Project administration, Writing - review & editing. Yubin Zhao: Project administration. Yue Zhang: Project administration. Youhui Gao: Project administration. Zongjun Cui: Conceptualization, Methodology, Resources, Funding acquisition. Xiaofen Wang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Resources, Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition.


Appendix A Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2020.123378.


Appendix A Supplementary data

The following are the Supplementary data to this article: