TITLE: Understanding the role of mechanical pretreatment before anaerobic digestion: Lab-scale investigations


1 Introduction

In France, about 65% of anaerobic digestion sites use agricultural waste, green waste or the organic fraction of municipal waste as feedstock. Indeed, France produces a considerable amount of manure and crop residues [1]. In Europe, over 70% of the biogas produced comes from anaerobic digesters of agricultural wastes, manure and energy crops [2]. This feedstock is mainly composed of lignocellulosic material, which is hard to handle and to degrade biologically. In addition it often causes mechanical troubles in the Anaerobic Digestion (AD) plants due to clogging issues [3,4]. Pretreatment operations are often proposed to improve agricultural biomass conversion to methane [5]. They enable a better handling of ligno-cellulosic biomass, including mixing of the co-substrates and pumping operations. Size reduction and alteration of the lignocellulosic structure are also expected to facilitate the action of microorganisms [6,7].

In the agricultural sector, mechanical pretreatments are the most applied operations. There is a wide range of mechanical technologies (ball mills, disc mills, chain mills, etc.), the hammer and knife mill being the most used [7]. Among their advantages, they are easy to use, they do not present risk of inhibitors production [6,8] and do not require the use of costly operations like rising the temperature or adding chemicals [9].

Concerning pure mechanical effects, particle size reduction is the most common criteria used to qualify the efficiency of mechanical operations [10,11]. [3,8] found a significant particle size reduction applying a cross flow grinder at full-scale. Likewise, the evaluation of a two-hammer mill at full scale showed the particle size reduction mainly occurred for the larger fibers [12]. [11] found an increase about 20% of thinner particles and a reduction of more than 50% of coarser particles applying a laboratory chopper as mechanical pretreatment. In addition, they made a farm-scale evaluation with different precision forage harvesters. In this case, the particle size reduction varied between 1.2 and 5.6 times the nominal chopping lengths. In addition, particle size reduction may lead to a homogenization of organic matter which enables a better handling of substrate and prevents from layer formation [3]. Additionally, it improves the substrate flow properties [13]. Mechanical pretreatments also affects the structure of the lignocellulosic compounds [14,15]. The breakdown of lignocellulosic compounds exerts a positive effect on the methane production. Some authors [8,16,17] described an enhancement of the biochemical methane potential (BMP) from 25% to 83.5% for diverse lignocellulosic substrates; others [18,19] reported no significant differences between raw and mechanically pre-treated samples. In short, the literature reveals the positive effect of mechanical pretreatments on methane production, but the results are mitigated by the type of substrates and mechanical devices used [9,20]. Particle size reduction is often associated to an increase of the biochemical methane potential [15,21,22]. However, it is not clear if this effect is only due to size reduction, or to a combination of other effects, like mechanical destruction of the lignocellulosic structure [15]. Solubilisation is also an important effect of mechanical treatments [6,23]. However, we observed that it much probably affects the rate of methane production rather than the intrinsic biodegradability of the lignocellulosic compounds [24].

In this context, it is clear that mechanical pretreatments improve the physical and biochemical characteristics of agricultural feedstock. However, to our knowledge, there are still very few objective criteria enabling to qualify separately the different effects of mechanical pretreatments. Indeed, mechanical operations are a combination of functions like size reduction, mixing and fiber breakdown. The purpose of the present work was to investigate these functions separately at lab-scale: a shredding operation, which aimed at reducing the particle size; a mixing pretreatment in order to homogenize the organic matter; and a tougher operation of blending which it is deemed to a deeper breakdown of fibers. We applied these three operations sequentially. We aimed to check up the functions of every pretreatment and associate them with the main expected effects. To achieve this objective, we carried out a physical and a biochemical characterization of raw and pre-treated samples. We applied this procedure to three types of feedstock: cattle manure, maize and triticale silage and a mixture of cattle manure and maize + triticale silage. In parallel, three full-scale mechanical devices were investigated with the same characterization procedure. The objective was to understand their mode of action according to the function assigned to the lab-scale devices.


2 Material and methods


2.1 Lab-scale feedstock and pretreatments

We have selected 4 agricultural feedstock from 2 farms (see Table 1 ).- M1 is cattle manure from a farm located nearby Lyon (Monts du Lyonnais, Rhône, France); - M2 is cattle manure from a farm located in Ennezat (Puy de Dôme, France); - S is a mixture of maize and triticale silage from the same farm than M2; - SM is a mixture of silage S and cattle manure M2 used to feed the AD plant. According to the plant operator, the proportion of silage and manure was 1:3 in fresh weight.

All samples were stored at 4 °C on the day of sampling, and processed within 7 days. However, the SM sample was suspected to be unstable even at 4° and it was also characterized immediately after sampling.

We applied three successive mechanical pretreatments: shredding (I-PT code in Table 1), shredding and mixing (II-PT) and shredding, mixing and blending (III-PT). The specifications for each lab scale device are listed on Table 2 . II-PT and III-PT were carried out with water addition in a 10:1 Water content/Total Solids (TS) ratio which corresponds to the same proportion for performing the substrate characterization [25].

These three successive pretreatment operations were chosen in order to mimic existing functions:- a knife mill for I-PT (low speed), whose role is to reduce the particle size; - a pulping operation for II-PT, whose role is to favor the extraction of organic compounds into the liquid phase; - a fine blending operation for III-PT (like wet grinders in industrial applications), whose role is to alter the lignocellulosic structure and to create a homogeneous liquid slurry.


2.2 Full scale feedstock and pretreatments

We have selected 3 sites of AD plants managing agricultural residues and using mechanical pretreatments:- The first investigated site was an on-farm AD plant (La Bouzule, Meurthe-et-Moselle, France) treating cattle manure (M3). The mechanical pretreatment was a mobile hammer mill (Noremat Valormax BA915D). The sample taken after the pretreatment is referred to as HM3. - The second site was an on-farm AD plant also treating cattle manure (M4). The mechanical pretreatment was a fixed (on line) hammer mill. The sample taken after the pretreatment is referred to as HM4. The device used cannot be disclosed for confidentiality reasons. - The third site was the METHELEC AD plant located in Ennezat (France). The mechanical pretreatment was a X-Chopper chain mill (Xergi). The incoming feedstock was the same mixture of silage and cattle manure used for lab-scale pretreatments (SM). The sample taken after the pretreatment is referred to as CH-SM.


2.3 Sample characterization procedure

Each sample (before and after pretreatment) was characterized according to the method proposed by Teixeira Franco et al. [25]. This procedure consists in separating the liquid and the particulate fraction after a leaching test with 10:1 water/TS proportion during 2h under a constant bottle rotation. Afterwards, samples were centrifuged (20 min at 5000 G) and filtered at 1.2 μm. The particulate fraction (remaining solid) was dried (70 °C) during three days. We used the liquid phase (supernatant) for further analysis. Analyses were performed for the raw sample, water soluble and particulate fraction:- Raw sample: Measurement of Total solids (TS), Volatile Solids (VS), Biochemical Methane Potential (BMP), particle size distribution, water retention capacity (WRC); - Water soluble: Measurement of Total solids (TS), Volatile Solids (VS), BMP, pH, Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD); - Particulate: Total solids (TS), Volatile solids (VS), Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD).


2.3.1 Biomethane potential test assays (BMP)

BMP tests were carried out in mesophilic conditions (35 °C) according to the guidelines proposed by Ref. [26]. Each bottle contained at least 20 g_VS of biomass (substrate + inoculum) and a 0.5 substrate/inoculum ratio on Volatile (VS) basis. The inoculum was digested sludge from the wastewater treatment plant of La Feyssine, Lyon, France. Its TS and VS content was 2.7–3%wt and 1.9–2.1%wt respectively. Besides, a mineral solution containing essential elements for microbial growth was added following [27] standard recommendations (ISO 11734, 1995). Finally, glass bottles were purged with 80/20 %v N_2/CO_2 before incubation. The headspace pressure was measured with a Digitron precision manometer. When the pressure was higher than 1200 hPa, biogas was vented.

The BMP tests were stopped when the daily methane production fell below 1% of the total methane production for three consecutive days. The BMP was calculated by substracting the blank methane production from the inoculum. All tests (including blanks) were carried out in triplicate.

The methane production is expressed in standard conditions (0 °C, 101325 Pa). We used a 1st-order model to fit the net methane production (i.e., after subtracting the blank methane production) to the following equation: FORMULA: V C H 4 ( t ) = B 0 ( 1 − e − k t ) -B _0: the final (or ultimate) maximal biochemical methane potential, - k, the 1st order kinetic parameter.

The Biodegradability (BD) of the substrates was estimated from BMP and COD measurements, considering that 1 g COD consumed would produce 0.35 L of methane in standard conditions [28]. FORMULA: B D ( % ) = B M P [ L S T P / k g V S ] C O D [ g C O D k g V S ] × 0.35 [ L S T P g C O D ]


2.4 Particle size distribution

A wet sieving method with water recirculation was performed. the sieve openings were 0.25, 0.5, 1, 4, 10, 20.0 and 31.5 mm [12,29]. Each fraction was dried at 105 °C during 24h. The results were expressed in terms of TS distribution. All tests (on raw and pretreated samples) were performed in triplicate.


2.4.1 Water retention capacity (WRC)

The water retention capacity WRC was measured following the procedure described by Coarita Fernandez et al. [12]. It consists of water contact with substrate in a column for 2 h. First, water is pulled out by gravity and then, with a vacuum system during 120 s. The mass of water retained per mass of total solid was the water retention capacity [30]. All samples were analyzed in triplicate.


2.4.2 Analytical procedures

The TS and VS contents for all samples were determined through 105 °C drying for 24h and calcination at 550 °C during 2h. Considering the volatile compounds loss during the drying tests [31], corrected values were taken into account using the volatilization coefficients at 100 °C as suggested by Ref. [32]. For measuring pH, we used a Consort C3020 device with a SP10B pH-electrode. Particulate COD was measured following NF U 44–161 and NF ISO 14235 standards.

The biogas composition in the BMP tests was measured by gas chromatography. We used an Agilent 300 microGC with a thermal conductivity detector (GC-TCD) The carrier gases were Argon and Helium and the columns as stationary phases were Molsieve 5A (14 m length; pore size: 5 Å) and PoraPlot (10 m length; 0.320 mm ID).


3 Results


3.1 Feedstock characteristics

Incoming substrate characteristics are given in Table 3 . The TS (%TW) contrasted with substrate, it was of 29.9% for M2, 16.0% for S and 23.5% for SM. On the other hand, VS(%TS) were similar for M2 and SM with 78.5. The VS content of S was 83.9% which is a commonly reported value for this kind of feedstock [20,33]. Values of TS for M2 corresponded to “solid” manure (25–31.9% TS) [8,34].

The COD/VS ratio was similar for M2 and S with 1350 mg/g VS_RS and 1309 mg/g VS_RS respectively. A lower ratio was found for SM (1180 mg/g VS_RS). However, the fresh SM sample (measured immediately after sampling, not shown in Table 3) had a slightly higher ratio (1203 mg/g VS_RS). That means that some oxidizable fraction was probably lost upon storage. In addition, a decrease of VFA contents was found between fresh and stored SM (results not shown) along the time which it is probably due to the slight biological consumption of VFAs during storage at 4 °C [20].

The methane potential for cattle manure was in accordance with commonly reported data [4,24]. The BMP values were higher for S than previously reported for similar products [11,17]. The BMP of the SM sample (180) was much lower than the one measured on the fresh sample (227.1 ± 4.4 mL/g_VS, not shown in Table 3), which confirms that the sample was degraded after 1 week storage at 4 °C. Nevertheless other results near to ours were also reported [35]. In fact, the effect of storage (at 4 °C in the dark for 1 week) was obvious. The instability even at low temperature of this kind of mixture was already noticed [36]. [37] reported no biochemical changes on for pig manure after storage at 4–6 °C. Consequently, even if storage at 4 °C is considered sufficient for a short period [38], this was obviously not the case for silage + manure.

The mechanical pretreatments were all evaluated with the stored products. This is problematic since SM evolved significantly during storage, while the other products did not change. In the following, SM will be considered as a specific product (and not as a combination of the two other substrates).

The methane production rate can be compared through the 1st order kinetic constant. The substrate with the highest methane rate was S (0.20 ± 0.01 d^−1), while SM and manure (M1 to M4) presented lower values (from 0.055 to 0.070 d^−1). Once again, fresh SM had a kinetic constant 25% higher than stored SM, which indicates that readily degradable products were probably degraded upon storage.

The anaerobic biodegradability was similar for manure M2 and SM (44% approximately), and higher for silage S (64%). Likewise, this does not sound logical if we consider that SM is a mixture of both, but once again the evolution upon storage is a reasonable explanation for this result. The biodegradation of water-soluble compounds of fresh SM was twice higher than that of stored SM (results not shown) which confirms a significant degradation of organic soluble compounds upon storage. Soluble compounds can be rapidly converted to methane [25,39]. Indeed, for SM, a low contribution of the water-soluble phase to the total BMP was found.


3.2 Lab-scale pretreatments


3.2.1 Particle size reduction

The effect of the pretreatments on particle size is shown on Fig. 1 . For manure (Fig. 1a), most of TS was composed by particles shorter than 0.25 mm (30%), followed by particles between 10 and 20 mm (25%). Other fractions did not reach more than 10% TS. M-I-PT led to a main reduction of particle size, higher than 31.5 mm that turned into smaller fibers. The proportion of particles shorter than 0.25 mm remarkably increased from 30% (M2) to 50% for M2-III-PT. Indeed, M2-III-PT was the substrate with the shortest particles compared to the other treated samples.

For silage, more than 50% of particles were 20–31.5 mm sizes and the second largest proportion was particles shorter than 0.25 mm (20% approximately), other measured fractions were not higher than 10% TS. S–I-PT showed the most obvious reduction of particle size, those 20–31.5 mm particles turned into 10–20 mm sizes. Others measured particles sizes were practically unchanged (Fig. 1b); particle size was mainly impacted by the first pretreatment.

For SM, particles shorter than 0.25 mm and between 10 and 20 mm were the largest fractions (30% approximately each one). SM-I-PT led the largest particles (20–31.5 mm) turning into shorter particles (4–0.5 mm). In SM–II–PT and SM–III–PT, 10–20 mm fraction was reduced and it turned into shorter particles (Fig. 1c). SM–III–PT presented the shortest particle size in general.

To summarize the results, the shredding operation (I-PT) mostly reduces the size of the larger particles (>20 mm) into smaller ones, probably in the range 10–20 mm. The blending operation (III-PT) produces fine particles (<0.25 mm) from higher particles. However, blending does not change much the overall structure of the distribution. This size particle reduction trend was also found by Ref. [11] using laboratory devices. By their part [17], reported mostly a coarse reduction of ensiled meadow grass particles applying different mechanical devices; the coarsest particles turned into medium ones. However, the fraction reduction of the thinnest particles was not uniform and it depended on the mechanical equipment.


3.2.2 Water retention capacity (WRC)

The WRC of untreated products ranged from 4.56 to 7.22 g_water/g_TS. This parameter was positively correlated with the presence of silage: M2 had the lowest value, followed by SM and S [40]. reported WRC values between 4.4 and 6.7 g water/TS for different lignocellulosic feedstock's. For other manure samples, we obtained values between 5.6 and 6.5 g water/TS. Raw silage is commonly recognized as an easily biodegradable product and high WRC is one of the parameter that makes it more accessible to micro-organisms [17]. The reason is that WRC is associated to the internal porosity of the solid. The effect of mechanical pretreatments on the WRC is represented on Fig. 2 .

For the 3 products, WRC increased noticeably during the second pretreatment (II-PT). This means that the combination of shredding and mixing enables to favor the penetration of water into the biomass. Interestingly, the blending operation (III-PT) led to a global decrease of the WRC, with the exception of silage. This was probably caused by the combined effect of size reduction and of alteration of the macrostructure of lignocellulosic fibers, as mentioned by other authors [41].


3.2.3 Biochemical methane potential (BMP)

Table 4 presents the result of biochemical methane potential of raw and pre-treated samples. The contribution of the soluble fraction to the total BMP is also shown, as well as the 1st order kinetic constant (k). For cattle manure M2, pretreatments did not lead to a significant increase of BMP (+8% after the last pretreatment III-PT compared to untreated M2), in agreement with our previous results [24]. In contrast, other authors obtained a more significant enhancement (up to 45%) under a combination of two heavy plates pretreatment with digested fibers manure sieved at 2 mm [4]. The BMP of silage increased by 21% upon blending (III-PT). However, moderate treatments (S–I-PT and S–II–PT) had no significant effect. ANOVA test showed only statistically differences between untreated and blended silange (S and S–III–PT). These results indicate that for the silage, an intensive mechanical pretreatment could be favourable to an increase of the biodegradability. For example [33], did not find differences on biodegradability between untreated and chopped plant silage (tall fescue, Festuca arundinacea). In the same way [10], reported an enhancement of 10% on methane yield for maize silage with a kitchen blender pretreatment. More generally, the BMP increase was not statistically significant for M2 and SM (test ANOVA at p: 0.05). In the same way, the anaerobic biodegradability during mechanical pretreatment operations followed a similar trend than the BMP.

In other words, coarse size reduction (like shredding in our case, or chopping in the cited reference by Feng et al.) does not change the biochemical methane potential of the product tested. In contrast, the use of a blending operation may, in some cases, increase the BMP. This result was observed for silage in our case, and in Bruni et al., which means that lignocellulosic structures are probably disrupted upon blending.

The contribution of the water-soluble fraction to the BMP did not vary much along the successive pretreatments. For cattle manure samples, it increased from 15 (raw sample) to 18% (after blending). For silage, this contribution increased upon shredding S–I-PT (32%). Surprisingly, S–II–PT and S–III–PT did not contribute to the release of further soluble biodegradable organic matter. For SM however, the initial contribution was only 4%, and it increased noticeably to around 21% along the pretreatments.


3.2.4 Kinetics

For each product tested (untreated and pre-treated), the BMP tests were run simultaneously with the same inoculum. The differences observed in the methane production rate is thus representative of a modification of the bioavailability of the products upon pretreatments. The net methane production always followed a 1st order kinetics. The kinetic constant k is thus a good indicator of the efficiency of the pretreatment (Table 4). For manure, k increased when the pretreatments became stronger (+23% between M2 and M2-II-PT and +32% between M2 and M2-III-PT). A similar enhancement (+18%) was reported with the same substrate in a previous work [24]. For silage, an enhancement of 27% of methane rate was obtained between S and S–I-PT, and 12% between S–II–PT and S–III–PT. Hence, for silage, the coarse shredding operation was more effective than the following successive pretreatments. Some authors reported a decrease in the digestion time between 35.7%–43% with a grinding pretreatment for lignocellulosic substrate [41,42]. The behaviour of SM was interesting, with a noticeable increase of k with pretreatments; indeed, an enhancement of 84% (SM-I-PT) and 90% (SM–II–PT and SM–III–PT) compared to SM was obtained. ANOVA test on k-values indicated a significant difference between untreated and pre-treated samples for this parameter.

For the tested products, the first coarse shredding operation seemed to have the most important effect on methane production rate. This illustrates that particle size reduction may rather affect bioaccessibility (increase of methane production rate) than biodegradability (increase of BMP). This outcome is also in line with other reported results [6,22,43].


3.2.5 COD distribution

The COD distribution between the particulate and the water-soluble fractions are shown on Fig. 3 a, b and 3c for M2, S and SM, respectively.

For manure, the soluble COD fraction increased from 12 to 18% with the successive pretreatments. This increase was attributed to the release of soluble proteins according to the TKN balance (results not shown). The other soluble compounds (VFA and soluble carbohydrates) remained practically unchanged. Other water-soluble compounds also increased with the pretreatments.

For silage, COD solubilisation was more limited (increased from 22 to 27%) (Fig. 3b). In general, the concentrations of soluble compounds increased regularly with pretreatments. Both shredding and blending operations contributed to solubilisation. Other organic compounds concentrations was low and their increase was not significant.

For the SM mixture, a significant COD solubilisation occurred (Fig. 3c). The most important enhancement was between the SM and SM–III–PT, with the decrease of around 10% of particulate COD. A release of VFA was observed with pretreatments, but most organic compound solubilisation occurred during blending(SM–III–PT).


3.3 Effect of pretreatments at full-scale

The values of the most important parameters obtained at full scale are summarized in Table 5 . For cattle manure M3 the BMP did not change after the pretreatment with the mobile hammer mill. The fixed hammer mill used for M4 slightly increased the BMP (from 199 to 224 mL/gVS) but this improvement remains close to the confidence interval. These results are in line with those obtained by Ref. [11]; and by Ref. [3]. Only the chain mill had a significant impact on the BMP of the mixture of silage and manure (SM: +49%).

The most striking effect of all mechanical pretreatments is the significant enhancement of the kinetic constant of methane production rate, who is improved by 14, 27 and 140% for HM3, HM4 and CHSM, respectively. The general trend observed is an increase of the soluble compounds (results not shown) and an increase of the contribution of the soluble fraction to the methane potential.


4 Discussion


4.1 Major effects of mechanical pretreatments

The first effect of the investigated pretreatments is particle size reduction. The first shredding operation (I-PT) eliminated the largest particles (>20 mm) that are generally responsible for mechanical problems in AD plants (clogging). The fine blending operation (III-PT) further reduced the number of particles above 10–20 mm. It also promoted the production of fine particles (<0.25 mm). In practice, this comminution effect would also reduce viscosity, as shown by other authors [12,44]. The second effect was the noticeable increase of the water retention capacity upon shredding and mixing operation (I-PT and II-PT). This result is in accordance with the expected effect of increasing the bioaccessibility of the solid matrix [45]. The blending operation (III-PT) however globally reduced the WRC; this is most probably due to the production of fine particles in suspension in the bulk liquid and to the reduction of the macro-porosity due to fiber destruction. The mixing and the blending operations were the most efficient steps to extract soluble compounds from the solid matrices.

Concerning the methane production, two possible effects could be expected: first, the increase of biodegradability, which would have resulted in a higher methane potential (BMP); second, the increased bioaccessibility of organic compounds, which would have resulted in a quicker methane production (increase of the 1st order kinetic constant k). From our results, the mechanical pretreatments mostly affected the methane production kinetics. The most surprising result is that the shredding operation (I-PT) was the most efficient step concerning this parameter at the lab-scale, while the blending step only brought a limited input. Indeed, we could expect that the increase of the kinetics would be related to the solubilisation of organic compounds, the latter being rather observed during the following treatments. Another noticeable result is the BMP did not change much during the pretreatment operation, with exception for silage after blending (III-PT). However, pretreatments have impacts on several parameters and this complexity can be better understood by a statistical analysis presented in the following section.


4.2 Assigning functions to full-scale mechanical pretreatment devices

In order to have a better vision of the influence of the effects of the mechanical pretreatments on these properties, a statistical analysis of correlation was carried out. A principal component analysis (PCA) of all the results obtained at the laboratory scale was performed. The first two axes of the analysis explain approximately 73% of the variance. These two axes therefore allow us to describe the variability of the trials in a satisfactory manner. We use these axes to find different correlations among the evaluated physicochemical properties (Fig. 4 ). Besides the parameters listed in Table 3, two supplementary parameters concerning particle size have been added: the percentage of particles below 20 mm and the percentage of particles below 1 mm.

According to our results, the kinetic constant "k" is directly correlated to the solubilisation of COD. It is also correlated to the contribution of the soluble fraction to the methanogenic potential. The solubilisation of biodegradable organic compounds is therefore significantly correlated with the rate of methane production, which sounds logical since soluble organic compounds are more rapidly accessible to microorganisms [46]. However, the reduction in particle size does not appear to correlate with the increase in kinetics. This can be explained by the fact that the reduction of the size of the largest particles by simple grinding does not allow significant solubilisation of the organic matter, unlike the blending step which seems to have a disrupting effect on the fibers. The results suggest a correlation between size reduction (production of particles smaller than 1 mm, i.e, relevant of fiber destruction) and methane production. This correlation confirms the importance of particle size reduction for anaerobic digestion. For example [20], report a statistically significant correlation between particle size and biodegradability. These authors clearly demonstrated an increase in methane production during particle size reduction on biomasses rich in lignocellulosic compounds such as wheat straw. To fewer extent, the water retention capacity is also correlated to the BMP, as already mentioned by other authors [45]. In brief, the increase of small particles and the increase of the water retention capacity could be valuable indicators of fiber destruction and of an increased biodegradability.

All different samples (untreated and mechanically pretreated, lab-scale and full-scale) have been plotted according the two principal component (Fig. 5 ). From this plot, we have drawn 4 area (in color):- The red area (bottom left) entails all untreated samples (lab-scale); - The brown area contains all samples after simple shredding at lab scale (I-PT); - The green area contains all the samples after mixing at lab-scale (II-PT); - The blue-green area contains all the samples after blending at lab-scale (III-PT).

In addition, the untreated and pretreated full-scale samples have also been added (3 points each due to triplicate tests). The purple zone corresponds to the cattle manure M3 treated by the mobile hammer mill (HM3), the pink zone to the cattle manure pretreated by the fixed hammer mill (HM4) and the blue zone to the mixed manure silage SM pretreated with the chain mill (CHSM).

This representation allows to see a shift from the bottom left to the top and to the right according to the intensity of the pretreatments. First, all untreated sample are located in the red zone (bottom left). The simple shredding zone (I-PT) and the blending (III-PT) zone are clearly separated, while the mixing (II-PT) is an intermediate.

The full-scale treatments with a hammer mill (HM3 and HM4) fall into the shredding region, HM3 being more shifted to the right and HM4 to the top. On the other hand, the chain mill zone (CHSM) falls even further than the blending operation at lab-scale.

This enables to assign more precisely the role of each full-scale pretreatment according to their function:- The tested hammer mills have a similar impact than a simple shredder: reduction of particle size, slight increase of methane production rate, no increase of biodegradability; - The chain mill has an impact that is more pronounced than the blending operation: particle comminution (increase of the amount of small particles), fiber destruction, increase of the biodegradability (BMP).


5 Conclusions

We used sequential mechanical pretreatment at lab-scale in order to reproduce several supposed effects associated to industrial mechanical pretreatments before anaerobic digestion. Mechanical pretreatments influenced mainly on kinetics and they led to a soluble compounds release who enables somehow a faster methane production rate. Nevertheless, they did not influence significantly the methane yield. According to the type of substrate used, every mechanical function had a different effect. However, some common characteristics may be pointed out. The shredding operation mostly reduced the amount of larger fibers. It increased the water retention capacity and the methane production rates. The mixing pretreatment further increased the WRC and favored solubilisation. The blending pretreatment was stronger, its effects were observed on i) the improvement of the amount of small particles and ii) the BMP improvement for silage, probably because it modified the lignocellulosic structure. The principal component analysis of the results made possible to assign the full-scale pretreatment according to the functions expected from the lab-scale tests. The tested devices were two hammer mills and a chain mill. The PCA reveals that the effect of the tested hammer mills was similar to that of a simple shredding operation, while the effect of chain mill was stronger than that of the blending operation.


 Funding

This work was supported by the French National Environmental Agency (ADEME) through the GRAINE-ADEME program 2016 (grant number n° 1706C0013).

This work was realized within the Graduate School H_2O'Lyon (ANR-17-EURE-0018) and Université de Lyon (UdL), as part of the programme "Investissements d'Avenir " run by Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR).

Helen Coarita Fernandez held a doctoral fellowship provided by the Ministerio de Educación del Estado Plurinacional de Bolivia.


 Author contributions

Rémy Bayard: Project supervisor and validation, Experimental design, Writing and validation. Pierre Buffière: Project supervisor and funding acquisition - management, Writing and validation. Helen Coarita Fernandes: Experimental investigations, Data management, Writing of the original draft.