TITLE: Evaluation of thermal, ultrasonic and alkali pretreatments on mixed-microalgal biomass to enhance anaerobic methane production


1 Introduction

The rapid growth of microalgae in eutrophication makes the drinking water treatment difficult and disturbs the ecosystem of rivers and lakes. Several microalgae excrete harmful toxins which can damage human health through drinking or skin contact. Therefore, many studies have focused on the proper way of reducing microalgal bloom such as flocculent settling using clay (Sengco and Anderson, 2004) or barley stew (Barrett et al., 1996), ultrasonic destruction (Nakano et al., 2001), and a combination of ultrasonic irradiation and coagulation (Heng et al., 2009). Recently, removing microalgae from drinking water bodies has become a challenge that came along with the climate changes in Korea.

On the other hand, bioenergy production via mass culture of microalgae is being studied throughout the world, and efforts are being made to industrialize bioenergy production using them. Microalgae produce O_2 and effective products by consuming CO_2 and photo-energy which is spontaneously recycling. In addition, their photosynthesis efficiency (3–8%) is higher than that of terrestrial plants (0.5–2%), and yields a higher biomass production per a unit area (Vasudevan and Briggs, 2008). Moreover, specific conditions such as nitrogen depletion stimulate microalgae’s ability to accumulate lipid in their cells unlike plants in which the condition is likely to result in plant diseases or no fruits (Hu et al., 2008). Thus, mass production of microalgae promotes reduction of CO_2 in the atmosphere and shows the unexplored potentials of microalgae to become a feedstock for biodiesel, a renewable energy for transportation fuel besides the utilization for food additives (Becker, 2007), health supplement foods (Benedetti et al., 2004), pigments (Wiltshire et al., 2000), livestock or fish farm feed (Roeck-Holtzhauer et al., 2009).

There are many ways to recover the photo-energy fixed in microalgal cells; thermochemical liquefaction (Sawayama et al., 1999; Huang et al., 2010), transesterificaion (Huang et al., 2010; Xu and Mi, 2011), gasification (Chakinala et al., 2010; Huang et al., 2010), thermo-hydrolysis (Alzate et al., 2012; Keymer et al., 2013) and pyrolysis (Huang et al., 2010). Methane production from microalgae biomass through anaerobic digestion is one of the methods which have been used for energy production from wet organic wastes to date.

In anaerobic digestion, microalgae can be used as a substrate for methane production. The main advantages of anaerobic digestion for energy recovery from microalgae are: (1) the microalgae harvested from water-based culture systems may directly act as a substrate, (2) the microalgae lipid-extracted, transesterified and co-digested with glycerol can be used for the substrate of anaerobic digestion (Keymer et al., 2013), (3) final residues remaining after anaerobic digestion can be used for fertilizers due to its high nitrogen contents as a disposal method, and (4) they can apply to microalgae harvested from various natural environments.

The compounds and structure of microalgae are various: no distinguishable cell wall, compounds that are mainly protein-originated, and cellulose or hemi-cellulose family compounds, other sugars and algal-resistant polymers. The pretreatment methods for effective energy recovery from organic matters can vary depending on the energy recovery process or energy forms; hydrothermal acid pretreatment for ethanol production (Nguyen et al., 2009; Harun and Danquah, 2011), a low temperature (Passos et al., 2013), thermal, alkali and ozone pretreatments for anaerobic digestion (Bougrier et al., 2006), decreasing temperature and increasing pressure for biodiesel production (Halim et al., 2011).

In this study, the energy recovery from microalgae biomass through anaerobic digestion were investigated, and evaluated the energy recovery efficiency of three pretreating methods, thermal-, ultrasonic-, and alkali-pretreatments, on microalgae for anaerobic digestion. The potential of anaerobic degradation was estimated by performing the biochemical methane potential (BMP) test after applying the pretreatments. The economic feasibility of energy recovery was assessed on the basis of balancing input and output energy. In addition, considering that microorganisms convert cells of microalgae into methane and carbon dioxide via organic acid on anaerobic digestion, the microbial community involved in the BMP test was investigated by means of the polymerase chain reaction and the denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (PCR-DGGE) technique.


2 methods


2.1 Substrates and inoculum

A mixture of a Chlorella sp. (70% dry cell weight of total microalgae biomass weight, w w^−1) and a Scenedesmus sp. (30% dry cell weight of total microalgae biomass weight, w w^−1) was prepared as the substrate for anaerobic digestion in this study. Each biomass was harvested by sedimentation and centrifugation (5 min, 3000 rpm) after cultivation in cylindrical photo-bioreactors (the working volume is 22 L) under continuous illumination with fluorescent light (20 μmol m^−2 s^−1) at 25 °C. A modified Bold’s Basal Medium was used for the cultivation: K_2HPO_4 75 mg L^−1, MgSO_4·7H_2O 251 mg L^−1, CaCl_2·2H_2O 25 mg L^−1, KH_2PO_4 175 mg L^−1, NaCl 25 mg L^−1, H_3BO_3 28 mg L^−1, MnCl_2·4H_2O 3.60 mg L^−1, ZnSO_4·7H_2O 22 mg L^−1, CuSO_4·5H_2O 3.92 mg L^−1, Na_2MoO_4·2H_2O 1.92 × 10^−1 mg L^−1, Na_2EDTA·2H_2O 49.9 mg L^−1, KOH 31 mg L^−1, FeSO_4·7H_2O 12.4 mg L^−1, H_2SO_4 1.86 mg L^−1, CoCl_2·6H_2O 7.99 × 10^−1 mg L^−1, NaNO_3 250 mg L^−1, NaHCO_3 840 mg L^−1.

The anaerobic sludge obtained from an anaerobic digester at Su-yeong WWTP in Busan, Korea was used as the inoculum to decompose the microalgae mixture in the following BMP test. Each concentration of the substrate and the anaerobic sludge was adjusted to ca. 5 g-VS (Volatile Solid) L^−1, respectively, by using distilled water, and then BMP experiments were conducted after mixing them.


2.2 Pretreatments

Several pretreatment methods such as thermal-, ultrasonic-, and alkali-treatment were selected from the preliminary study and literature review (Bougrier et al., 2006; López Torres and Espinosa Lloréns, 2008), and they were applied to enhance anaerobic digestion of the mixed-microalgae biomass by partial destruction of cells. However, the pretreatments stronger than the strengths applied in this study were not attempted because of high input energy costs.

Thermal-pretreatment was conducted for 30 min at 50 °C and 80 °C with a water bath (CW-10G, Jeio Tech), and at 120 °C with an autoclave (HAC-045, LK LabKorea). Ultrasonic pretreatments was conducted for 30, 90, and 180 s on an ultrasonicator (VCX-130, Vibra-Cell) of 130 W. Alkali pretreatment was adjusted to pH 9, 11, and 13 by 5 N NaOH. The efficiency of solubilization by the pretreatment methods was calculated by the following equation expressed as a function of changes in chemical oxygen demand (COD_cr).

S (%) = (SCOD_f − SCOD_i) × 100/(TCOD_i − SCOD_i)

where S, SCOD, and TCOD refer to solubilization (%), soluble chemical oxygen demand (SCOD, f: final, i: initial) (m L^−1) and total chemical oxygen demand (TCOD, mg L^−1) in that order.


2.3 Biochemical methane potential (BMP) test

A BMP test provides the optimum condition for anaerobic digestion and has an advantage of simple measurement of biogas and methane produced. Hence, the test has been widely used to evaluate the maximum potential of methane production which is obtainable from certain substrates in a batch experiment of anaerobic digestion (Angelidaki et al., 2009; Alzate et al., 2012). The BMP test was conducted in 100 mL glass serum bottles sealed with Teflon rubber septum in this study. The substrate and inoculums (1 to 1, g g^−1) adjusted to 10 g-VS L^−1 were mixed, and the total working volume was set at 60 mL. The pH was adjusted to pH 7 after the mixing, and the headspace of the bottles was flushed with N_2 gas to maintain an anaerobic condition. The gas and methane production obtained from each pretreated mixed-microalgae biomass on the BMP tests were compared with those obtained from non-pretreated mixed-microalgae biomass.

The BMP tests were carried out in duplicates for each sample. The bottles were placed in a shaking incubator of 80 rpm at 37 °C (B-201S, Hanbaek Scientific Co.). Samples were collected periodically for analysis. Biogas and methane production were measured throughout the incubation period of 23 days at appropriate time interval. During the initial 7 days after the incubation, the biogas and methane production were measured with the interval of 1 day and with the interval of 2 or 3 days after the initial 7 days. The biogas production was measured after sampling with a glass syringe, and the content of methane produced was determined by a gas chromatography (GC5890, Hewlett Packard) equipped with a thermal conductivity detector. The biogas production was corrected for STP condition (Angelidaki et al., 2009). At the end of the BMP tests, the final SCOD_Cr concentrations in each sample were measured to estimate the SCOD_Cr removal efficiency.


2.4 Effect of initial solubilization by pretreatments on BMP tests

Two samples thermal-pretreated at the temperatures of 50 °C and 120 °C for 30 min were selected for this experiment because the solubilization of the biomass thermal-pretreated by the temperature of 120 °C was the highest, which respected as showing the highest gas production among all pretreatments. The bottles containing non-pretreated microalgae were used for the control. The solid and liquid phases were separated by centrifugation (10 min, 3,000 rpm), and then each phase was adjusted to 30 mL of distilled water before using it as the substrate for the further BMP test.


2.5 Intermediates analysis in BMP tests

To understand the correlation between the changes in the concentration of intermediates and methane production on the incubation time, the concentrations of glucose and volatile fatty acid (VFA)s, such as acetate, propionate, lactate, butyrate and valerate, were analyzed during the BMP test of 25 days. The BMP test of this case was carried out in quadruplicates for each sample and the total working volume was set at 80 mL for the incubation of 25 days. The biogas and methane production were measured, and simultaneously the sample of 1 mL was collected for the analysis of glucose and VFA concentrations.


2.6 Microbial community analysis

To identify the difference of anaerobic bacteria community in each sample for the BMP test, PCR-DGGE analysis was performed (Muzyer et al., 1993). The DNA isolation kit (Power-soil DNA isolation kit, Mo Bio) was used to extract the total genomic DNA from the samples derived from each BMP bottle. Bacterial 16S rRNA genes were amplified from the extracted genomic DNA by PCR using Thermal Cycler (MyCycler, Bio-Rad) with the universal primers of GC clamped 27F (5′-CGC CCG CCG CGC GCG GCG GGC GGG GCG GGG GCA CGG GGG GAG AGT TTG ATC M(A/C)TG GCT CAG-3′) and 518R (5′-ATT ACC GCG GCT GCT GG-3′) (Kaksonen et al., 2004).

The PCR protocol included an initial denaturation of 95 °C for 5 min, 30 cycles of 95 °C for 1 min, 53 °C for 1 min, 72 °C for 2 min of denaturation, annealing, and extension followed by 5 min of final extension at 72 °C. DGGE was performed with a D-Code System (BioRad). The PCR amplification products were loaded onto 8% (w v^−1) polyacrylamide gels with a denaturing gradient from 30% to 60%. The DGGE was run for 6 h at 200 V. After electrophoresis, the gel was stained with ethidium bromide and captured by using a digital camera (Olympus). For the identification of DGGE bands in individual samples, several DGGE bands were cut, eluted in 50 ml of TE buffer overnight, and ligated into the blunt T-vector (Solgent, Korea) after re-amplifying the DNA fragments with the same sequences but with no GC clamped primer set. Then, the cloned DNA fragments were sequenced with M13 F primer using an ABI PRISM 3700 DNA analyzer. The results of the partial RNA gene sequences were compared with the sequences enrolled in the BLAST database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/).


2.7 Analytical methods

Total solids (TS) and volatile solids (VS) were measured by the standard methods. TCOD, SCOD concentrations, and the ammonia nitrogen (NH_3–N) concentrations were analyzed with a water test kit (HS 2300, Humas Co. Ltd.). Methane content in biogas was analyzed by a gas chromatography (GC, 5890, Hewlett Packard) equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (carrier gas: He, oven temperature: 35 °C, column temperature: 100 °C, detector temperature: 220 °C), and pH was determined with a pH meter (Orion 3 Star pH Benchtop, Thermo Scientific). The concentration of glucose, acetate, lactate, butyrate and valerate was analyzed by a high performance liquid chromatography (Ultimate HPLC system, Dionex; Aminex®HPX-87 H column (300 × 7.8 mm); Bio-RAD RI-101 detector, Shodex; column temperature: 65 °C, flow rate: 0.5 mL min^−1, carrier: 2.5 mm H_2SO_4). All samples for the analysis of glucose and VFA concentrations were filtered by using disposable 0.20 μm PVDF syringes after centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 5 min.


2.8 Net energy balance

To assess the economic feasibility of the pretreatements, the input (E _in) and output energy (E _out) were calculated by applying the following methods. Net energy (E _net) balance indicates the difference between E _in and E _out.


2.9 Input energies at thermal- and ultrasonic-pretreatment

E _in (kJ g-VS^−1) = P _d·t/1,000·C _s·V _d

where P _d, t, C _s and V _d refer to device power energy (P _d, J s^−1), pretreatment duration time (t), microalgae concentration (C _s, 10 g-VS L^−1) and effective volume (V _d, L).


2.10 Input energy at alkali-pretreatment

E _in (kJ g-VS^−1) = V _a·N _a·W _a·Y _a·P _E/C _s·V _s

where V _a, N _a, W _a, Y _a, P _E, C _s and V _s refer to the used volume of NaOH (V _a, L), Normal concentration of NaOH solution (N _a, 5 eq L^−1), the equivalent weight of NaOH (W _a, 40 g eq^−1), the cost of NaOH (Y _a, 1.55 × 10^−2 $ g^−1), reciprocal industrial electricity rates (P _E, 13.82 × 10^−2 kJ $^−1), microalgae biomass volume (V _s, 0.03 L), microalgae concentration (C _s, 10 g-VS L^−1) in that order.


2.11 Output energy

E _out = 35.315·P _CH4 Y _CH4/1000

where 35.515, P _CH4 and Y _CH4 indicate the constant coefficient (35.315 kJ L-CH_4 ^−1), methane productivity per g-VS (mL-CH_4 g-VS^−1) and recovery of methane (here, it is assumed as 100%).

The methane productivity P _CH4 is calculated by the following equation. The volume of methane produced, which is the value of the volume of methane produced a standard condition (0 °C, 1 atm), was divided by the quantity of volatile solid (VS) in the bottles.

P _CH4 (mL CH_4/g VS) = V _0- CH4 gas volume (mL)/VS _algae (g)


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Effect of pretreatments on methane production

The initial total-COD_Cr (TCOD) and soluble-COD_Cr (SCOD) of the raw microalgae were 12,330 mg L^−1 and 770 mg L^−1, respectively, without pretreatments. In all the pretreatments to which mixed-microalgae was applied, the SCOD_Cr increased with the strength of the pretreatments (Table 1 ).

The accumulative biogas and methane production for the incubation time of 23 days are shown in Fig. 1 and the daily gas production showed as the Supplementary 1. The productivity increased linearly for initial 3 days in all bottles, but it began to decrease gradually. Then the production was almost stopped after 16 days of incubation.

There was a positive correlation (P value of 0.00057) between the soluble CODs and methane production except the samples alkali-pretreated. The highest accumulated biogas production (accu-GP, 204.0 ± 2.4 mL) and methane production (accu-MP, 121.5 ± 2.3 mL) were obtained from the microalgae biomass thermal-pretreated at 120 °C for 30 °C. These are 1.1 (accu-GP) and 1.2 times (accu-MP) higher than those obtained from the non-pretreated microalgae mixture which showed the amounts of 180.6 ± 0.0 mL (accu-GP) and 100.8 ± 0.2 mL (accu-MP).

However, the increased methane production was not proportional to the increase of SCOD by the pretreatments; for an example, the maximum difference of the initial SCOD between the samples, non-treated and thermal-treated with 120 °C, was 5 times while the accumulative methane production showed 1.2 times. The lack of correlation between the solubilization and methane production as well as the superiority of thermal pre-treatment on methane production using microalgae resources have already reported by Alzate et al. (2012) and Keymer et al. (2013).

The ratios (v v^−1) of methane gas to total biogas production were similar in the range of 56∼60% (Fig. 1) except the microalgae biomass alkali-pretreated to pH 13 which showed below 45% (43.6%). The alkali-pretreatment to pH 13 suspected to have partially damaged the activity of the inoculums because the initial pH of the mixture reached pH 10.2. It is out of the optimum pH ranges for anaerobic digestion (Mata-alvarez et al., 2000) even though the high pH was adjusted to pH 7.0 before the incubation for the BMP test. This would explain why the remaining SCOD on final Day 23 was the highest in the sample (Fig. 1).

Among the methane productivities obtained through the BMP tests, the biggest maximum productivity (336 mL-CH_4 g-VS^−1) was compatible with the others; Yen and Brune (2007) reported as 136 mL-CH_4 g-VS^−1. In addition, the value of 336 mL-CH_4 g-VS^−1 is comparable with the results obtained from the anaerobic digestion with single species of microalga digestion (Ras et al., 2011). This indicates that the substrate of the mixed microalgae has a sufficient potential to generate bioenergy as the form of methane through anaerobic digestion although the higher value obtained from this study might be overestimated due to the stable batch mode cultivation of this study unlike the continuous cultivation in a bigger reactor performed by Ras et al. (2011).


3.2 Effect of solubilization by the pretreatments on methane production

The maximum solubilization was observed by the thermal pretreatment at 120 °C, and the amount was five times as the amount of 4,080 mg-SCOD/L compared with that of the non-pretreatment (735 mg-SCOD/L).

To estimate the effect of initial solubilization of microalgae by the pretreatments on methane production, the solid and liquid phases were separately collected and each of them supplied into the bottles as the only substrate for the BMP test. According to the results, the maximum attribution of the liquid phase in the thermal-treated samples was 10.8% (v v^−1) of the total methane production while it showed 3.1% (v v^−1) in the control (non-pretreated samples). This demonstrated that most methane production did not result from the liquid phases but the solid phases even though the initial difference of SCOD, mainly due to the difference of solubilization, were kept till the final incubation time.

It speculated that the biological decomposition of the substrates would act stronger than the pretreatments in the solubilization of microalgae cells. In short, the substrate, microalgae biomass, might be decomposed by hydrolysis of anaerobic bacteria rather than by the pretreatments (Yen and Brune, 2007). According to these findings, the methane production would be more improved by other factors, for examples inoculums, loading rates and pH control, to affect biological activity itself rather than physical- or chemical-pretreatments.

However, it was true that the biggest difference was obtained from the liquid phase of the biomass pretreated by the strong thermal-pretreatment of 120 °C for 30 min, and it produced a higher methane amount (14% to the total methane production) than that (3%) obtained from the biomass pretreated by the relatively weak thermal-pretreatment. In other words, the strong strength pretreatment might have enabled the substrate to easily decompose by anaerobic bacteria in the bottles, and the total amount of accumulated methane production was affected by the initial difference SCOD among the samples until the cultivation was finished. In conclusion, the low solubilization by the pretreatments applied in this study could not show a big difference on the methane production, which was well corresponded with a recent result reported by Gonzalez-Fernandez et al. (2013).


3.3 Intermediates changes on the BMP tests

Fig. 2 depicts the concentrations of VFAs and accumulated methane production on the cultivation time. Glucose, lactate, propionate and acetate were detected from both samples, in which non-pretreated substrate and strong thermal-pretreated substrate were applied, and measured from the incubation time of Day 0. From the two samples, glucose was detected for the whole incubation period of 25 days, while lactate, propionate and acetate were mainly detected for the initial period of incubation, and even the concentrations of acetate and propionate were so different for initial 5 days between the two samples. The thermal-pretreatment might have enhanced the transformation of glucose to the smaller carbon organic acids which could be removed quickly as the forms of methane gas. Therefore, the methane production between the samples of thermal-pretreated and non-pretreated was quite different as 41.1 mmol L^−1 day^−1 and 33.4 mmol L^−1 day^−1 in the order.

However, the difference in the accelerated methane production disappeared gradually with incubation time, and it became similar after the incubation period of Day 4. Wang et al. (1999) have reported a same fact that a rapid transformation of VFA in the sewage waste sludge treated by the sonication resulted in an improved initial methane production.


3.4 DGGE results for microbial community analysis

To understand the changes in the microbial community on the BMP experiments, PCR-DGGE was conducted, and the gel image is shown in Fig. 3 . When the microbial communities sampled on Day 15 are compared with those of Day 0, the number of DGGE bands reflecting the major populations in the microbial community increased in the bottles having non-pretreated microalgae rather than that in the bottles having the thermal-pretreated microalgae. The bands numbered 1, 5, 6, 9, and 10 were expressed on the lanes for the non-pretreated sample, and the bands of 1, 5 and 6 were especially clear with the sample harvested on Day 1, but the intensity of the bands weakened and disappeared by Day 15, relatively (Fig. 3).

Band 1 showed a high similarity of 99% with the rRNA gene sequence of Aquimonas sp. D11–21 (Krieger et al., 2006), and band 5 was affiliated with a species of Gibberella moniliformis (99% similarity) (Bömke et al., 2008). They have been reported as the species of denitrifying bacteria found in red or green algae. Band 6 was affiliated with uncultured Bacterioidetes sp. (99% similarity) which belongs to proteolytic bacteria (Rivière et al., 2009). This indicates that the bacterial groups might be involved in destruction of microalgal cell walls because the bacterial bands were derived from the non-pretreated sample.

The bands of 2, 3, 4, 7, and 8 were expressed in all samples. The DNA sequences of band 2 were affiliated with uncultured Synergistetes bacterium species (98% similarity) which has the ability to decompose amino acids to single chained volatile fatty acids (Rivière et al., 2009). Acinetobacter sp. (band 7, 100% similarity) can decompose lignin and amino acids (Abdel-El-Haleem, 2004), and Alcaligenes Genus (band 8, 100% similarity) was proposed as acid forming bacteria (Steinbüchel and Schlegel, 2006).


3.5 Analysis of net energy balance

The input and output energy on each pretreatment were calculated to evaluate energy balances and summarized in Table 1 and Fig. 4 . The results of net energy balance analysis indicate that the ultrasonic- and thermal-pretreatments resulted in negative net energy while alkali- treatments resulted in a weak positive net energy. However, the increase of net energy obtained from the alkali pretreatments was not far superior to that obtained from non-pretreated samples. Furthermore, it may be not practically positive as considering the cost for completely mixing the chemical and biomass in a practical scale. These findings led us to conclude that the pretreatments applied in this study were insufficient to promote the methane production on anaerobic digestion of the microalgae.


4 Conclusion

The solubilization of microalgae cells increased with the increased intensity of pretreatments, thermal-, ultrasonic- and alkali-pretreatments, which resulted in the increase of initial SCOD and methane production on the BMP tests. The biggest solubilization was obtained by the thermal-pretreatment of 120 °C (29%). However, the improvement of methane production by the pretreatments was not superior of input energy cost or ignorable. Therefore, it is recommended that raw microalgae be applied directly as the substrate for anaerobic digestion, because it did not result in a significant energy gains compared with that of the non-pretreated samples in the view of energy balance.


Appendix A Supplementary data

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2013.06.017.


Appendix A Supplementary data

