TITLE: Assessment of organosolv, hydrothermal, and combined organosolv and hydrothermal with enzymatic pretreatment to increase the production of biogas from Napier grass and Napier silage


1 Introduction

Biofuels derived from microorganisms have received considerable attention owing to their accessibility, sustainability, and renewability. Methane is a biofuel produced from various types of biomass and organic waste via the anaerobic digestion (AD) process [1]. Production of methane from lignocellulosic materials (LMs) such as agricultural residues and energy crops has garnered increased interest owing to their abundance, renewability, and low cost; further, they do not have a competing use in the human food supply chain [2,3]. In this study, Napier grass was chosen as a potential carbon source for methane production because of its high biomass production of about 87 t/ha/year [4], rapid growth, broad adaptation [5], and 22.6%–42.4% of cellulose content [5–7]. Napier grass and Napier silage can be converted into biogas [8]. Napier silage contains varying amounts of volatile fatty acids (VFAs), lactic acid, ammonia, and alcohols formed during ensiling [9]. However, the high lignin content in Napier grass and silage acts as a physical barrier, preventing enzyme access for converting structural carbohydrates into fermentable sugars [3]. Thus, removing lignin and structural changes is essential to improve enzymatic hydrolysis (EH) [10]. For example, thermal-assisted hydration pretreatment using hydrogenic effluent has been reported to split and crack the surface of Napier grass and its silage [11]. Alkaline pretreatment using NaOH, Ca(OH)_2, NH_3, and alkaline H_2O_2 was applied to delignify Napier grass before EH [12]. In this study, organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatment were used to pretreat Napier grass and silage before being used to produce methane. Organosolv pretreatment is recognized as one of the most promising methods for altering the composition of LM. It involves the use of organic or aqueous organic solvents to break the internal lignin and hemicellulose bonds at elevated temperatures [13]. Hemicellulose and lignin can be degraded into a small fraction and dissolved in the liquor during the process, while purified cellulose is recovered as pulp [14,15]. Various solvents such as ethanol, methanol, and acetone can be used for organosolv delignification [14]. Ethanol-based organosolv has been extensively studied for pretreatment purposes because ethanol is a renewable solvent with low toxicity, high volatility, and ease of recycling [14–16]. Several studies on ethanol-based organosolv have been conducted based on the catalyzation process, such as acid-catalyzed, alkali-catalyzed, and auto-catalyzed [14,16]. The auto-catalyzed process involves using an ethanol-water solution without adding mineral acid, as it is believed that organic acids released from biomass can catalyze hemicellulose hydrolysis and delignification at a high temperature (usually 180–220 °C) [14,16]. However, ethanol-based organosolv has drawbacks such as high solvent use, energy consumption in its recovery [17] and cost of solvent and its catalysts. Compared to ethanol-based organosolv, hydrothermal pretreatment has a lower cost [18]. Hydrothermal pretreatment allows the utilization of LM without chemical addition using water and high temperatures (150–230 °C) [19]. During the process, acid hydronium ion (H_3O^+), formed by water auto-ionization, catalyze the hydrolysis of polysaccharides (mainly hemicellulose) in biomass to form sugars (pentoses and hexoses) [19].Therefore, hydrothermal processing is effective for hemicellulose hydrolysis and alteration of cellulose and lignin structure [19].

Previous studies report that organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatment could improve the efficiency of the AD process from LM. For example, Jomnonkhaow et al. [20] used organosolv and hydrothermal to pretreat Napier grass and silage and found that the methane yield (MY) increased from 232 and 207 (without pretreatment) to 278 and 264 mL/g-substrate_added, respectively. Ostovareh et al. [21] found that the organosolv pretreatment of sweet sorghum stalks improved MY by 270% compared to the untreated sweet sorghum stalks. In addition, organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatment increased MY from 124 (untreated sunflower stalks) to 278 and 234 mL/g-VS, respectively [22]. Furthermore, Miscanthus pretreated by hydrothermal pretreatment produced a higher MY (101 mL/g-VS) than untreated Miscanthus (89 mL/g-VS) [23].

This study aimed to evaluate the impact of organosolv, hydrothermal, combined organosolv, and hydrothermal treatment with enzyme pretreatment using various chemical catalysts and pretreatment time to improve methane production from Napier grass and silage. Moreover, the effects of pretreatment on the chemical composition, structural changes, and EH of Napier grass and silage were investigated. The overall energy yields from methane production of Napier grass and silage under optimum conditions were calculated. This study provides an efficient pretreatment method to obtain the underlying sugar from Napier grass and silage before being used as feedstock for methane production.


2 Materials and methods


2.1 Raw materials

Napier grass and silage were kindly provided by SF Khon Kaen Co., Ltd. (Khon Kaen, Thailand). Mature Napier grass was harvested after two months of growth. It was chopped using a forage chopper to a particle size of approximately 5 cm × 5 cm and ensiled in a closed container by self-fermentation for two weeks. Both Napier grass and silage were dried at 60 °C in hot air oven and ground in a food blender until the materials could pass through a 40-mesh screen to achieve a size of less than 0.425 mm. Samples were stored in plastic bags at room temperature (35 ± 2 °C) prior to use. The total solid (TS) of Napier grass and silage were 944.9 ± 2.8 and 937.9 ± 1.3 g TS/kg, respectively, while the volatile solid (VS) were 854.7 ± 9.8 and 864.4 ± 5.5 g VS/kg, respectively.


2.2 Inoculum preparation

Anaerobic sludge was used as an inoculum for methane production. It was collected from the biogas plant of SF Khon Kaen Co., Ltd. (Khon Kaen, Thailand). The plant co-digests Napier silage with chicken manure to generate biogas. Enrichment of anaerobic sludge was performed in 6 L bottles, where 4 L of sludge was mixed with 10 g of Napier silage and incubated at room temperature for 3 weeks. After that, non-degradable materials were separated from the anaerobic sludge by filtration through a 10-mesh screen before use as the inoculum. The TS and VS of anaerobic sludge were 102.5 ± 1.1 g TS/L and 68.3 ± 0.4 g VS/L, respectively.


2.3 Organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatment

An organosolv pretreatment was conducted in 150 mL high-pressure stainless-steel vessels with a 100 mL working volume. Ten grams of Napier grass or silage was mixed with 100 mL of 50% (v/v) aqueous ethanol at a solid to liquid ratio of 1:10, with or without the addition of 1% (w/w) (based on dried mass) H_2SO_4, HCl, CH_3COOH, or NaOH as catalysts. For hydrothermal pretreatment, distilled water was used with or without the addition of 1% (w/w) of the catalysts (H_2SO_4, HCl, CH_3COOH, or NaOH). The vessels were heated in an oil bath at 190 °C for 15, 30, 45, and 60 min. Subsequently, the vessels were removed from the oil bath and placed in an ice bath to stop the reaction. The pretreated solid and liquid fractions were separated by filtration through a filter cloth. In organosolv pretreatment, the pretreated solids were washed with 100 mL of 50% (v/v) aqueous ethanol, followed by washing several times with distilled water until a pH of 7 was attained. For hydrothermal pretreatment, the pretreated solids were washed several times with distilled water until the pH reached 7.0. The solid fractions obtained from organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatment were then dried overnight at 60 °C in a hot air oven. The solid fractions of all pretreatment conditions (with and without catalysts) were further used to analyze the biomass composition, EH, and methane production. The experimental design of organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatment is presented in Table 1 .


2.4 Enzymatic hydrolysis

A mass of 1.5 g of either organosolv or hydrothermally pretreated Napier grass and silage from each treatment (with or without catalysts) was mixed with 30 mL of 50 mM sodium citrate buffer at pH 5.0 and then loaded into a 120 mL serum bottle before sterilization in an autoclave at 121 °C for 15 min. Next, Cellic® CTec2 (Novozymes, Denmark) at 20 filter paper unit (FPU)/g-substrate was added to the bottles. The hydrolysis was conducted at 50 °C in an incubator shaker at 150 rpm for 72 h. After hydrolysis, one mL of the liquid sample was taken for reducing sugar analysis using the 3,5-dinitrosalicylic acid method [24]. The remaining enzymatic hydrolysate with a solid residue was used for methane production. All experiments were performed in triplicate.


2.5 Methane production

Anaerobic batch digestion was performed in 120 mL serum bottles with a working volume of 70 mL. For methane production from organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatment, 1.5 g of organosolv, hydrothermally pretreated Napier grass, and silage from each pretreatment condition (with or without catalysts) were used as the substrate. For methane production from combined organosolv and combined hydrothermal with enzyme pretreatment, 29 mL of enzymatic hydrolysate and solid fraction mixture of pretreated Napier grass and silage from each pretreatment condition were used as substrates. Each bottle consisted of the substrate at a designated amount and 20 g VS/L of anaerobic sludge. A digestion control was conducted using untreated Napier grass and silage, and enzyme-pretreated Napier grass and silage as the substrate. Moreover, a digestion control consisting of a mixture of anaerobic sludge and distilled water was used to determine the biogas production from the inoculum. Modified basic anaerobic medium (modified from Angelidaki and Sanders [25]) (4.48 mL) was added to each bottle, and the volume was adjusted to 70 mL with distilled water. The initial pH was adjusted to 7.0 by either 5 M HCl or 5 M NaOH. The bottles were then closed with rubber stoppers and aluminum caps and purged with nitrogen gas for 5 min to create anaerobic conditions. All experiments were performed in triplicate. The bottles were incubated at room temperature on an orbital shaker at 150 rpm. During AD, the biogas volumes were measured using the wetted glass syringe method [26]. Gas samples were withdrawn from the headspace of each bottle, and their methane content was analyzed using gas chromatography (GC). The overall schematic diagram of this study is shown in Fig. 1 .


2.6 Analytical methods

Cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin contents were analyzed in accordance with the NREL/TP-510-42618 standard methods [27]. The unit contents of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin were expressed as a percent of the dry weight. TS and VS were determined using the APHA standard methods [28]. Morphological changes in Napier grass and silage before and after pretreatment were analyzed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (JSM-6610LV, JEOL, Tokyo, Japan) and energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry (X-MaxN, Oxford instruments plc, Abingdon, UK).The concentrations of sugars were determined using high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (LC-10AD, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) equipped with a refractive index detector using an Aminex HPX-87H column (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) and the method of Nualsri et al. [29]. Methane and carbon dioxide contents of the biogas were analyzed using a GC (GC-2014, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) equipped with a thermal conductivity detector and a 2 m stainless steel column packed with Shin carbon (50/80 mesh) following the method of Sitthikitpanya et al. [30]. The volume of methane in the biogas was calculated using the mass balance equation [31]. A modified Gompertz equation was used to fit the cumulative methane production curves to determine the methane production (MP) [32]. The methane production rate (MPR) was determined from the maximum cumulative MP divided by fermentation time (h) [33]. MY was calculated by dividing the cumulative MP by the amount of substrate added (g-VS_added). The energy yield (EY) was calculated by multiplying the MY (L/g-VS_added) by the energy content (36 kJ/L-CH_4 (STP) equivalent to 50 kJ/g-CH_4) [29]. The solid yield was calculated based on the dry weight unit (Eq. (1)). Lignin removal (Eq. (2)) and hemicellulose removal (Eq. (3)) were calculated as follows: FORMULA: S o l i d y i e l d ( % ) = 100 × s o l i d a f t e r p r e t r e a t m e n t ( g ) s o l i d b e f o r e p r e t r e a t m e n t ( g ) FORMULA: L i g n i n r e m o v a l ( % ) = 100 − l i g n i n c o n t e n t i n p r e t r e a t e d s o l i d ( % ) × s o l i d y i e l d ( % ) l i g n i n c o n t e n t i n u n t r e a t e d s o l i d ( % ) FORMULA: H e m i c e l l u l o s e r e m o v a l ( % ) = 100 − h e m i c e l l u l o s e c o n t e n t i n p r e t r e a t e d s o l i d ( % ) × s o l i d y i e l d ( % ) h e m i c e l l u l o s e c o n t e n t i n u n t r e a t e d s o l i d ( % )


3 Results and discussion


3.1 Effect of pretreatment on the solid yield, chemical composition, and structure of Napier grass and silage

After the pretreatment process, only solid fractions were used in further experiments, while the hydrolysate was discarded. The hydrolysate contains significant amounts of sugars that can be used to produce bioenergy, such as ethanol [21], bio-hydrogen [34], and methane, as well as biochemicals such as lactic acid [35], and polyhydroxyalkanoates [36]. In addition to sugars, the hydrolysate contains inhibitors such as ethanol, furfural, and 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF). Furfural and 5-HMF have been reported as inhibitors in biological processes such as EH and AD [37]. Since our objective was to discover an efficient method to recover the cellulose fractions, only solid fractions were used as the feedstock in this study.

Solid yields of Napier grass and silage decreased with the use of organosolv and hydrothermal treatment with and without catalyst (Table 2 ). Moreover, the solid yield decreased with increasing reaction time (RT) from 15 to 60 min. The lower solid yields at the longest RT were due to the extension of the RT, which increased the delignification and carbohydrate dissolution [15,38].

The cellulose content increased with organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatments with and without the catalyst (Table 2). An increase in the RT from 15 to 60 min resulted in increased cellulose content of pretreated Napier grass and silage due to the partial solubilization of lignin [39,40]. Organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatment effectively break down the hemicellulose and solubilize the hemicellulose fraction of the biomass, making the pulp of the cellulose fraction suitable for further degradation into fermentable sugar by EH [41].

For Napier grass, organosolv pretreatment with the addition of NaOH resulted in increased delignification. The use of NaOH as a catalyst with RT of 60 min resulted in the highest lignin removal of 54%. This is because alkali promotes the dissolution of lignin into an aqueous fraction because of the saponification of intermolecular ester bonds, crosslinking xylan hemicellulose, and lignin [13]. Therefore, alkali can assist aqueous ethanol solution in the fractionation of lignin from pretreated biomass. In contrast, the addition of H_2SO_4, HCl, or CH_3COOH as catalysts resulted in higher hemicellulose removal than NaOH as a catalyst and non-catalyst pretreatments. This finding was attributed to increased hydronium ion concentrations that catalyzed xylan hydrolysis caused by an increased acid concentration [16].

The highest hemicellulose removal of 49% was obtained from the pretreatment with H_2SO_4 as a catalyst with RT of 60 min. This result agrees with previous studies on ethanol-based organosolv, which showed that H_2SO_4 as a catalyst is active in promoting the solubility of the hemicellulose fraction in an organic liquor [42].

In the organosolv pretreatment of silage, the highest lignin and hemicellulose removal rates of 46% and 62% were obtained from pretreatment with H_2SO_4 as a catalyst with RT of 60 min. Additionally, pretreatment with HCl as a catalyst with RT of 60 min reached 44% and 50% of lignin and hemicellulose removal, respectively. Using strong mineral acids such as H_2SO_4 or HCl resulted in more effective lignin and hemicellulose removal in the organosolv pretreatment of silage (Table 2). Similar findings were observed by Wildschut et al. [15] who found that the addition of H_2SO_4 as a catalyst had a large impact on xylan hydrolysis and delignification in the organosolv pretreatment of wheat straw. The delignification process for an acid-catalyzed organosolv pretreatment is a consecutive process consisting of lignin fractionation and the solubilization of lignin fragments [16]. The possible reaction mechanisms for the fractionation of lignin are the acid-catalyzed cleavage of α-aryl ether and β-aryl ether bonds [43].

The effects of various catalysts and RTs on the solid yields and chemical composition of hydrothermally pretreated Napier grass and silage are shown in Table 2. Prolonging the RT strongly affected the increase in hemicellulose removal, which could be caused by the presence of hydronium ions generated by the autoionization of water at high temperatures (150–230 °C), leading to the splitting of the acetyl groups from the hemicellulose fraction of LM [19]. The addition of acid catalysts improved hemicellulose hydrolysis with the highest hemicellulose removal of 86% and 84% of hydrothermally pretreated Napier grass and silage, respectively, with H_2SO_4 as a catalyst at RT of 60 min (Table 2). However, prolonged pretreatment tends to increase the percentage of lignin in hydrothermally pretreated Napier grass and silage using acid catalysts and without a catalyst. The lignin content in hydrothermally pretreated Napier grass and silage was higher than that in the untreated materials. These results agree with those of Zhou et al. [44] who found that the lignin content of Miscanthus pretreated by hydrothermal treatment at 200 °C was much higher than that of the untreated material. Xue et al. [23] reported that the lignin content in Miscanthus was 20.34%, which increased to 21.19% after hydrothermal pretreatment at 175 °C. This was because the dissolution of the hemicellulose fraction in hot water caused the loosening of the linkages of lignin, hemicellulose, and cellulose, resulting in high lignin and cellulose contents [23]. In addition, Ran et al. [45] reported that following an increase in the temperature of the hydrothermal pretreatment of the washed vinegar residue, the relative contents of hemicellulose decreased while those of cellulose and lignin increased. As the temperature increased to 80, 120, and 160 °C, the lignin content increased from 15.8% (untreated washed vinegar residue) to 19.1%, 19.6%, and 20.1%, respectively. In contrast, the addition of NaOH as a catalyst had a slight effect on hemicellulose removal while more greatly affecting lignin removal (Table 2). The use of thermal-assisted NaOH reportedly removes lignin with minimal hemicellulose loss [46]. Kuttiraja et al. [46] reported that diluted NaOH pretreatment of bamboo biomass resulted in efficient lignin removal, effectively increasing cellulose concentration without affecting the hemicellulose structure.

Morphological alterations in untreated, organosolv, and hydrothermally pretreated Napier grass and silage were investigated using SEM images (Fig. 2 ). The results indicated that Napier grass and silage surfaces pretreated with organosolv and hydrothermal catalysts became loose and irregular. Organosolv and hydrothermally pretreated Napier grass and silage showed morphological changes compared to untreated biomass. Untreated Napier grass (Fig. 2A) has a compact structure. The hydrothermally pretreated Napier grass with H_2SO_4 as a catalyst and heated for 60 min (Fig. 2B) exhibited a more split or cracked structure than samples pretreated for 15 min (Fig. 2C). For silage, the slightly destroyed surface of untreated silage (Fig. 2D) was possibly due to carbohydrate degradation during the ensiling process [47]. The organosolv-pretreated silage with HCl as a catalyst for 60 min (Fig. 2E) displayed a more fragile and sponge-like shape with a greater internal surface area than untreated silage and those using shorter RTs (Fig. 2F). It can be concluded that the organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatment improved the accessible surface area of the biomass and left the accessible cellulose fraction in the solid for EH.

In addition, the SEM images at 3000 × magnification showed that the surfaces of untreated Napier grass (Fig. 2G) and organosolv pretreated Napier grass at RT of 60 min (Fig. 2H) were smooth. The pore size on the surface of organosolv-pretreated Napier grass at RT of 60 min was larger than that of untreated Napier grass. Conversely, some small droplets could be pseudo-lignin distributed on the surface of the CH_3COOH-catalyzed hydrothermally-pretreated Napier grass (Fig. 2I).


3.2 Enzymatic hydrolysis

Reducing sugar yield (RSY) from combined organosolv, and hydrothermal processes followed by enzyme pretreatment was higher than that of the enzyme pretreatment only (Fig. 3 ). Combined organosolv, and hydrothermal treatments followed by enzyme pretreatment of Napier grass showed higher sugar yields than combined organosolv, and hydrothermal treatments followed by enzyme pretreatment of silage due to higher cellulose and lower lignin content (Table 2).

The RSY from organosolv and hydrothermally pretreated Napier grass and silage at RT of 60 min were higher than that at RT of 15–45 min (Fig. 3A and B). The results showed that increased RT for organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatment resulted in a gradual increase in the digestibility of the lignocellulosic structure. The use of longer organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatment times led to higher cellulose content and increased hemicellulose and lignin removal, as shown in Table 2. In addition, the prolonged RT caused an increase in the accessible surface area of cellulose, making the material more accessible to the enzyme, thus enhancing EH [48,49]. These results suggest that RT has a strong influence on the efficacy of EH.

The highest RSY of 588 mg/g-biomass was obtained from pretreatment with NaOH as a catalyst at RT of 60 min for enzymatic pretreatment of organosolv-pretreated Napier grass (Fig. 3A). This was because the treatment with a NaOH catalyst produced greater removal of lignin and improved cellulose content. Removal of lignin can increase EH, as lignin acts as a physical barrier to prevent cellulose hydrolysis by the cellulase enzyme [50]. Koo et al. [51] also stated that organosolv pretreatment with NaOH on Liriodendron tulipifera degraded lignin and xylan, resulting in substantially increased enzymatic conversion, to 65%.

With regard to enzymatic pretreatment of organosolv-pretreated silage, an organosolv pretreatment with HCl catalyst for 60 min had the maximum RSY of 474 mg/g-biomass (Fig. 3B). Under these conditions, the removal of lignin and hemicellulose was high but not maximal (Table 2). The highest lignin and hemicellulose removal occurred after organosolv pretreatment using H_2SO_4 catalyst. As a result, the RSY from the enzymatic pretreatment of organosolv-pretreated silage with a H_2SO_4 catalyst was lower than that with HCl catalyst. These results suggest that although lignin content is an important factor affecting EH, the hydrolysis yield was not proportional to the reduction in lignin content. Cellulose crystallinity, accessible surface area, polymerization of cellulose, biomass swelling, and chemical composition are parameters that could affect EH [10]. These results are consistent with those of the previous studies. Amiri et al. [52] reported that rice straw pretreated with organosolv had a lower lignin content and lower glucose yield after EH. Del Rio et al. [53] showed that organosolv-pretreated mountain pine beetle-killed lodgepole pine had a low lignin content and a low cellulose conversion.

For enzymatic pretreatment of hydrothermally pretreated Napier grass (Fig. 3A) and silage (Fig. 3B), a maximum RSY of 634 and 466 mg/g-biomass was obtained from hydrothermally pretreated Napier grass and silage, respectively, with the addition of H_2SO_4 as a catalyst for 60 min. This result was because the samples treated with a H_2SO_4 catalyst yielded the maximum hemicellulose removal. The removal of hemicellulose also resulted in improved EH. Hemicellulose acts as a physical barrier between lignin and cellulose fibers, preventing cellulase from accessing the cellulose [10]. Consequently, the removal of hemicellulose increases the accessible surface area of cellulose and the possibility of the EH of cellulase, resulting in improved EH [10].


3.3 Effect of organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatments of Napier grass and silage on methane production


3.3.1 Influence of organosolv pretreatment on methane production

The MY of untreated Napier grass and silage was 215 ± 2 and 184 ± 3 mL/g-VS_added, respectively (Fig. 4 A and B). The MP, MY, and MPR tended to increase due to the increased RT, leading to higher cellulose content. Prolonged RTs improved hemicellulose and lignin removal. In addition, pretreatment with organosolv could destroy the cell wall structure and increase the surface area (Fig. 2E). However, at RTs of 45 and 60 min, MP, MY, and MPR did not differ significantly for silage (Fig. 4B). It may be because silage underwent a structural change during the ensiling process (Fig. 2D). The insignificance of MP, MY, and MPR at RTs of 45 and 60 min indicates that a RT of 45 min could have been sufficient to support the production of biogas.

Statistical analysis with Duncan's test was performed to determine the significant differences between the MY from pretreatment of Napier grass and silage with and without catalyst addition (Fig. 4A and B). At the longest RT of 60 min, the highest MY of 317 ± 1 mL/g-VS_added was obtained from the organosolv pretreatment of Napier grass without a catalyst (Fig. 4A), which was significantly higher than that obtained when using catalysts. However, the MPR obtained from pretreated Napier grass with a catalyst was higher than that obtained without a catalyst (Fig. 4A). In the case of silage, the highest MY of 261 ± 8 mL/g-VS_added was obtained from organosolv-pretreated silage using H_2SO_4 as a catalyst, but not significantly higher than in the case of HCl, NaOH, and without a catalyst (Fig. 4B). These results suggest that the use of catalysts did not improve the MY of the pretreated silage. Our results are consistent with previous findings that showed no significant differences in MY following use of various catalysts (H_2SO_4 and CH_3COOH) for the organosolv pretreatment of forest residues at 190 °C compared to the use of no catalyst [42]. In addition, it is believed that organic acids released from biomass can act as catalysts for the rupture of lignin-carbohydrate structures when the process is performed at high temperatures (185–210 °C) [54].


3.3.2 Influence of hydrothermal pretreatment on methane production

The MP, MY, and MPR increased with increasing RT to 45 min when using hydrothermally pretreated Napier grass with HCl and CH_3COOH, and without catalysts (Fig. 4A). Subsequently, it slightly decreased with an increased RT to more than 45 min. However, pretreatment with H_2SO_4 and NaOH as catalysts showed high MP, MY, and MPR at a 30 min RT. The addition of HCl or CH_3COOH resulted in poor MY, possibly because of the high lignin content, as shown in Table 2. Lignin acts as a barrier that reduces the access of microbes to cellulose [50]. The maximum MY of 255 ± 7 mL/g-VS_added was obtained from hydrothermally pretreated Napier grass with NaOH as a catalyst for 30 min (Fig. 4A). The maximum MY was not significantly higher than that obtained from pretreated Napier grass without the addition of catalyst at 45 min (247 ± 10 mL/g-VS_added) and the pretreated Napier grass with H_2SO_4 as the catalyst at 30 min (247 ± 15 mL/g-VS_added).

The hydrothermal pretreatment of silage without catalyst showed a high MP, MY, and MPR at RT of 45 min (Fig. 4B). The MP, MY, and MPR from pretreated silage with H_2SO_4, HCl, CH_3COOH, or NaOH as the catalyst decreased slightly after prolonging the RT to 45 and 60 min. A maximum MY of 228 ± 9 mL/g-VS_added was obtained from the silage pretreated with a NaOH catalyst for 30 min. However, it was not significantly higher than the MY of 221 ± 4 mL/g-VS_added obtained from the hydrothermally pretreated silage without catalyst at 45 min. Additionally, prolonging the RT to 60 min resulted in a lower MP (Fig. 4B). The prolonged RT of hydrothermal pretreatment caused a high lignin content in the pretreated silage (Table 2). This is due to the two-step reaction of lignin breakdown during hydrothermal pretreatment. First, lignin fragments are solubilized by breaking the lignin-carbohydrate bonds. Subsequently, lignin re-polymerization occurs in the presence of organic acids produced by hydrothermal pretreatment, resulting in insoluble condensation products [19]. As a result, prolongation of the RT caused the lignin re-polymerization process to be dominant. This result agrees with a previous study, which suggested that lignin re-polymerization would become prominent at longer RTs of steam explosion [55]. The depolymerized sample then produces an emulsion in hot water, and after prolonged reactions, lignin precipitates. Additionally, lignin could be redistributed on the fiber surfaces [56], as shown in SEM images (Fig. 2I). This redistributed lignin may play a critical barrier to microbial access to cellulose, negatively impacting biogas production. However, redistributed lignin was not observed in the untreated (Fig. 2G) and organosolv pretreatment of Napier grass (Fig. 2H).


3.4 Enhancement of methane production from Napier grass and silage using organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatment followed by enzymatic hydrolysis

MY of 301 ± 18 and 290 ± 1 mL/g-VS_added was obtained using enzymatically pretreated Napier grass and silage as the substrate, respectively (Fig. 5 A and B). A maximum MY of 418 ± 9 mL/g-VS_added was obtained from Napier grass pretreated with organosolv pretreatment with the addition of a NaOH catalyst at RT of 60 min. However, this maximum MY was not significantly different from MY using a NaOH catalyst for 45 min (410 ± 9 mL/g-VS_added) (Fig. 5A). This may have resulted from the high production of reducing sugars using organosolv pretreatment with a NaOH catalyst (Fig. 3A). A high initial reducing sugar concentration can result in a high MP.

In the case of silage (Fig. 5B), organosolv pretreatment without catalyst with RT of 45 min showed a maximum MY of 378 ± 15 mL/g-VS_added, but was not significantly different from pretreatment without catalyst (373 ± 8 mL/g-VS_added), or pretreatment with HCl (361 ± 4 mL/g-VS_added) and H_2SO_4 (361 ± 8 mL/g-VS_added) as catalysts with RT of 60 min. The reducing sugar obtained from organosolv pretreatment with no catalyst with RT of 45 min was therefore not significantly higher than that of organosolv pretreatment with no catalyst, HCl, or NaOH catalysts with a 60 min RT (Fig. 3B). This result indicates that a short RT (45 min) could have been sufficient to treat silage resulted in a high MP.

The MY obtained from hydrothermal pretreatment followed by EH is shown in Fig. 5A and B. In the case of Napier grass, increasing the RT to 60 min improved the MP when HCl, CH_3COOH, and NaOH were used as catalysts (Fig. 5A). In addition, pretreatment without a catalyst or the use of a H_2SO_4 catalyst improved MY as the RT increased to 45 min. RTs greater than 45 min resulted in a slight decrease in the MY. The RSY obtained at RT of 45 min was lower than that obtained at 60 min (Fig. 3A). A decrease in MY after 60 min pretreatment could be due to the microbes favoring the conversion of reducing sugar into hydrogen and gaining VFAs as by-products. This was supported by the observation of hydrogen gas at the beginning of the fermentation time (data not shown). Accumulation of VFAs in the fermentation broth caused a drop in pH and consequently inhibited methanogenic bacteria.

For silage, the hydrothermal pretreatment with no catalyst and H_2SO_4 as the catalyst showed an increasing MY with increased RT (Fig. 5B). Extending the pretreatment resulted in an increased amount of reducing sugars in the hydrolysate (Fig. 3B). The highest MY of 343 ± 16 mL/g-VS_added was obtained following pretreatment with a H_2SO_4 catalyst with a 60 min RT. The maximum MY was not significantly different from pretreatment without catalyst at the same RT (335 ± 9 mL/g-VS_added). In contrast, hydrothermal pretreatment with HCl, CH_3COOH, or NaOH catalysts showed that the MY did not improve after prolonged pretreatment.

Using the optimum pretreatment conditions, MY from organosolv followed by enzyme pretreatment was higher than that from hydrothermal pretreatment followed by enzyme pretreatment (Fig. 5). This is because organosolv pretreatment strongly removes lignin and has a highly accessible cellulose content, resulting in a high RSY. The high RSY implied that a high EH of biomass occurred. The MP, MY, and MPR obtained from combined pretreatments with enzymes were significantly higher than those obtained from pretreatment alone. This is because the cellulase enzyme could degrade the cellulose structure into fermentable sugar, which is the substrate for methanogens.

Moreover, the MP, MY, and MPR obtained from organosolv and hydrothermal treatments followed by enzyme-pretreated Napier grass and silage were significantly higher than the enzyme-pretreated Napier grass and silage (Fig. 5). This result is due to the organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatment breakdown of lignin and hemicellulose, leaving accessible cellulose. Moreover, the degradation of lignin and hemicellulose caused the enzyme to be directly attached to the cellulose structure and converted into fermentable sugars. In contrast, the lignin and hemicellulose structures obstructed the attachment between the enzyme and cellulose structure using EH without organosolv or hydrothermal pretreatment. Accordingly, the methane production of Napier grass and silage was enhanced by applying organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatment followed by EH.


3.5 Energy yield analysis

The pretreatment process influences the biomass structure and microbial conversion efficiency, resulting in a different EY. An effective pretreatment process for enhancing the EY from Napier grass was the combined organosolv pretreatment with a NaOH catalyst for 45 min followed by EH. Under optimal conditions, the maximum EY of 13.5 kJ/g-biomass (14.8 kJ/g-VS_added) (Fig. 6 A) was achieved. A decrease of EY of 12.3 kJ/g-biomass (13.2 kJ/g-VS_added) was obtained when using Napier grass with combined hydrothermal pretreatment for 45 min, followed by EH (Fig. 6B).

For silage, the maximum EY of 12.4 kJ/g-biomass (13.6 kJ/g-VS_added) was obtained using combined organosolv pretreatment at 45 min of RT followed by EH (Fig. 6C), which was 1.12 times higher than hydrothermal pretreatment at 60 min of RT, followed by EH (11.2 kJ/g-biomass or 12.1 kJ/g-VS_added) (Fig. 6D). EY obtained from both Napier grass and silage pretreated with organosolv was higher than that obtained from the hydrothermal treatment. This result is because the organosolv pretreatment could remove lignin better than hydrothermal treatment, in which the proportion of solid or cellulose fractions obtained from organosolv was high (Fig. 6). This phenomenon leads to an increase in the pore volume and surface area, facilitating enzyme accessibility. Moreover, the average EY obtained from Napier grass pretreated with combined organosolv pretreatment using a NaOH catalyst with a 45 min RT followed by EH was 1.92 times higher than that of untreated Napier grass (7.7 kJ/g-VS_added). The maximum EY obtained from silage pretreated with combined organosolv pretreatment with a 45 min RT followed by EH was 2.06 times higher than that of untreated silage (6.6 kJ/g-VS_added). These results showed that the application of EH on solid residue left over after organosolv pretreatment resulted in high sugar content. Consequently, the MY and EY increased.


4 Conclusions

Organosolv pretreatment is successful in removing lignin, whereas hydrothermal pretreatment effectively hydrolyzes hemicellulose. Prolonged organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatment times increased the efficacy of EH. The addition of catalysts to organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatment did not significantly increase methane production compared to pretreatments without catalysts. Superior methane production was found with the use of organosolv and hydrothermal pretreatment combined with EH.


 CRediT authorship contribution statement

Umarin Jomnonkhaow: Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original draft. Sureewan Sittijunda: Validation, Data curation, Writing – review & editing. Alissara Reungsang: Conceptualization, Project administration, Supervision, Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition.